So, uh, and we should see Brett Allison
coming through to us.
Gilda, can you hear me,
Gilda? Yes,
we can hear you.
Uh, we just can't quite see you at this point.
Oh, now if you wanted to pop on your video there. Yep.
It's on now. Can you see it?
Oh, there we go. We, we can,
we can see you and hear you, Brett.
Uh, look, you've got 10 minutes with us this afternoon,
so we'll hand over to you for your opening remarks.
And I should have with me Brett Allison,
who's the chairman of our company.
RA is centered on ota on the Otago Peninsula.
We oppose the bill on the basis that it weakens involvement
of Maori and the treaty partnership by demoting
UA engagement in substitutes consultation
with inviting written comments from TI
and the Minister of Maori Development, IE the Crown speaking
for ua.
UA hold, AKA
or marga, crucial to understanding local ecology
and other environmental factors,
potential impacts on cultural values
and longitudinal place-based knowledge.
The absence of a treaty clause, the requirements
to give effect to principles
and no safeguards, fa
and other environmental factors.
Um, uh, safeguards
to ensure Maori rights are upheld in decision
making are an issue.
It will reduce the overall quality
and authenticity of information
and decision making through compressed timeframes,
uniform deadlines, disadvantaged groups with unequal
capacity and fall short
of meaningful engagement on complex matters,
including cumulative effects on treaty settlements.
It will perpetuate a lack of transparency and allow orders
and council amendments risk being
reduced from an independent regulator to an instrument
of executive policy compromise,
both administrative law principles
and partnership, which requires
that Maori interests be assist
and protected through impartial evidence-based processes,
rather than political experience,
enabling political considerations to dominate,
which will result in Maori cultural
and treaty interests being subordinated.
So, introducing the government policy statement on benefits,
uh, GPS on regional national
benefits would become a relevant consideration for referrals
and decisions, including supermarkets.
Without clear safeguards, A GPS may be treated
as decisive, pushing aside effects based assessments in
general, treated by DGI regular related obligations.
I recall the late 1970s think big era
and the proposal for an aluminum smelter on the edge
of the Otago Harbor to import oxide and export aluminum.
While Fletcher's met with our community, we never met
with the International Consulting and Partners.
So no connection to community place or interests.
The proposed ANA smelter caused huge divisions
among community workplaces
and whanau across Otago, causing significant threat
to the lower Otago Harbor ecology, salt marshes,
local villages, and our papaka and Wahi tapu.
So the public process was protest was all consuming,
and it was all that seemed available, but cause,
but it did cause government back down.
While the decline in world price
of aluminum caused the major overseas investors to withdraw.
That traumatic experience triggered my work of a lifetime,
an environmental field.
It was that earth shattering for me to ex
to think this could happen with no process for us to,
um, be in properly engaged on the, on the process.
So, you know, and our ruining her as well, our help
who have been in good faith since then.
Engaged on all conservation RMA, fisheries,
legislative processes, building partnerships with councils,
agencies, cross policy plan,
and consent matters while the inconsistency of councils
and agencies, despite that work, were part of our wider
nhu treaty settlement process to ensure consistency
and adequacy of decisions.
When the Fast Track bill was introduced in 2024, the honor
port said, I quote, with regards to Titi
and the leaders of tribes, their view is
that the treaty settlements issues be safeguarded, agreed.
And the pages and discussions of this initiative
of the bill, it can be seen that at every management level,
at every decision making level, the applicant and ministers
and the panel must make contact with Maori, with Iwi
and with Hapu to discuss in depth the way forward.
So we have proactively engaged on fast track applications
across Otago Wind farm land and land port gold mining
and hydro proposals.
We recently opposed MACRA's Mining Consent
wasn't fast track, but it was a consent to extend the life.
Its of its Otago, um, operation MACRA's, um,
have long faced compliance issues with resource consents,
widespread non-compliance
with environmental monitoring conditions,
chemical level excesses, uh, damage to protected areas
and poor management practices.
Recent public statements by the Minister of Mining on
that consent application and food.
The local aka were demanding compensation from MACRAs.
What we had sought was that where a particular effect
is enabled to be avoided
or remedied, that mitigation include onsite compensation
that is by our diversity improvements.
So in summary, um, we recommend the following,
keep mandatory consultation with Iwi authorities, hapu
and Maori landowners at referral decision stages.
We treaty interests are involved,
provide at least 30 working days to respond,
require panels to invite written comments from UA
for projects, regardless of whether
a local authority provides comment, add a clause confirming
that nothing in the bill
or any position statement limits the duty to give effect
to the principles of the Treaty of wgi
Reserve panel discretion to invite expertise where Crown
or local local authority input is not enough, including
MAGA Maori and Species Ecology.
Include a mechanism to resource UA to engage
with fast track timeframes,
require targeted engage engagement with UA administering
agencies before any order in council that
changes project scope or location,
and remove the express plan, uh, plan pathway.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's, uh, completion
of our submission.
Thank you, Edward, for those insights
and for your submission.
Uh, look, we've got a couple of questions, so we'll go
to Rachel Brooking first.
Thank you. Thank you Edward and Brett, we'll be in there.
Uh, so Edward,
what you're saying is you're involved in current fast track
processes and you've got a, a host of suggestions
that you've just run through.
Um, is it fair to say that the, the fast track
as it currently is, it's not giving enough time
for involvement, and you think there needs to be more time?
So going totally in the opposite direction
of the amendments in this bill,
The current, uh, fast Track, uh, as it stands,
we are able to engage.
It's, uh, takes a sign significant organization to,
to be able to re respond.
We are active and working within those timeframes, but,
but the amendments will just knock.
Oh, that'll be bizarre. Complete. Cut us out. Thank you.
Thank you. And now we'll go to Debbie.
Uh, uh, I've got one question and stuff.
If we have time, um, through the chair.
Uh, what are the, uh, long term consequences for you
and your experience in your awa if the effects based
assessments are pushed aside, uh,
for GPS on economic benefits?
Right. I,
Um, sorry if I understand the question correctly.
Uh, and thank you for, thank you for the, the question, um,
the, the long we, we we're proactively engaging as Edward
as, as Edward, Edward noted with applicants.
Uh, we are, we do take a broad view.
Um, so we, when we do proactively engage with applicants,
we do explain that we have wider interest across cultural,
environmental, and economic values.
So we do assess, uh, and we're very pragmatic about it.
We wanna see job creation
and economic development within our TA are, um,
but we do have to have some, you know, key environmental
and cultural criteria that we have to stand by
and to take back to our communities that they can,
that provide that assessment.
But we, um, we certainly do value, uh,
the economic benefits or,
or the drivers of these, of these applicants,
but we do have to assess them far more broadly than,
than quite often, than we'll,
than we'll pigeonhole to believe.
Um, just a follow up on that.
I'm noticing the reconciliation of, um,
intergenerational focus.
What do you see, um, I guess,
and this might be too maua, um,
does this approach mirror any historical patterns you've
recognized and you, you, you mentioned the think big, um,
pattern, but I guess with the centralization
or the crown coming into saying
what you should be doing within the taua of, of, um, una,
You know, of course we have a history of observing this
before, prior to, uh, even far, uh, think back, you know,
we have a history of, you know, I could take you
to multiple places where we've lost completely all our,
you know, where there were want once rich wetlands
that you can walk on dry earth, you know, look, it's a,
a litany of those examples across our by,
by decisions made without our interest being at the table
or understood.
Kda. Kda, thank you very much
for your time today, Edward and Brett.
I appreciate your submissions
and, um, considerations there for the committee.
So thank you very much. Thank
You, Kaki.
Thank you Kaki.
So we will now, uh, welcome through our next submitter,
uh, the Hamilton City Council,
who hopefully we will be, uh, seeing soon.
Should be coming up on screen shortly. Madam Chair.
Um, the presenters from the council just need
to accept the prompt to join as a panelist.
Okay, brilliant. If they can hear us, if they just accept
that prompt to be brought through.
There we go. Uh, we can see Blair, I believe.
Just want to, oh, there we go.
Uh, we can see you and hopefully hear you too.
Yes, you can. Thank you. Brilliant to do so.
Thank you for the, uh, opportunity to present, uh, share.
Um, and I'd like to welcome beside me,
deputy Mayor Jeff Taylor, um, who's also the deputy chair
of our Growth and Economic Development Committee.
And also beside, uh, the deputy mayor is Council Maria Huta,
um, chair of our Growth and Economic Development Committee.
So I'm Blair Boco,
general manager, strategy, growth and planning.
I'd also like to acknowledge Ryan Hamilton,
MP Hamilton East, who has, uh, some very firsthand knowledge
of the matters we're about to submit on in his previous
role on council here.
So I'll first ask, uh, deputy Mayor Jeff
to introduce, and I'll say a few comments.
Thank you. Please, uh, Kiara, everyone.
Uh, and thanks again for the opportunity to submit today.
Uh, as uh, deputy Mayor, I, I want to emphasize that, uh,
Hamilton City Council, uh, is not just observing the impacts
of the Fast Track approvals amendment bill from afar.
Um, we are experiencing experiencing them
directly every day, uh, almost like a test case, really.
Uh, our city is at the forefront of fast track development
with several active projects on our borders, uh,
that have immediate
and significant implications for our infrastructure,
communities, and future growth.
Uh, Hamilton is totally immersed in fast track issues.
We are dealing with the practical realities
and challenges that arise when accelerated development
intersect with local governments.
Governances, our council has coalface, uh, experience,
meaning we are working hands-on with the complexities,
risks, and opportunities that fast track processes bring.
This includes navigating boundary adjustments,
managing cross jurisdictional planning, uh,
and ensuring that our residents interests are protected.
We see firsthand how the current legislative framework
affects our ability to consult, appeal,
and plan effectively for developments that sit just
outside our city limits,
but rely heavily on Hamilton's infrastructure and services.
Our experience gives us unique insight, if you like,
into the urgent need for statutory recognition of Hamilton
as a relevant local authority,
and for boundary adjustments to be prioritized
before development proceeds.
Hamilton's rapid growth and proximity
to major fast track projects mean
that our council's perspective is grounded in real world
impacts, not just theoretical concepts.
We are advocating for amendments that will ensure fair,
integrated and financially sustainable outcomes
for our city and its communities.
Thank you. So, chair, Catherine, just
before we take questions,
I'm just gonna share my screen briefly to just illustrate
what, um, uh, oh no, can I,
hopefully your team can enable us to share screen.
We do support the intent of the bill, um,
and as deputy me said, we just have some, uh, requests, uh,
around some amendments to address some,
some major financial planning
and governance, uh, matters that are relevant
to, to our circumstances.
Um, the first of those is around us being recognized
as a relevant local authority.
Um, if I can share my screen, I'll be able to show you a map
that shows Hamilton that has currently seven, uh,
fast track areas that are, um, that are on our periphery
that have been approved, and further three that are, um,
seeking referral, um, uh, in terms of, uh, the city.
So hopefully you can see this map here on the screen.
So the colored areas demonstrate around the city.
Um, the city is basically in the middle, the purple areas
of those that have been listed
and include in the fast track legislation,
the yellow areas are the areas
that are currently seeking referrals.
So in total, we have 10 fast track areas on our periphery
where Hamilton is not the relevant local authority.
Those areas are seeking
to utilize the city's infrastructure networks services
become an urban and bachelor city.
Um, but obviously, uh, for our city, the challenges are
that, that our development
contributions policies don't apply.
Our rating policies don't apply.
So in effect, we're not the relevant authority,
but there are substantial financial governance, uh, and,
and jurisdictional challenges that we face.
Stop this, stop the screen. So, and,
and of course, as you can imagine, the scale
of the infrastructure investment is substantial.
Um, it's many billions
of dollars in terms of those fast track areas.
And the unintended consequences of Hamilton is not able to,
to fully participate as a local authority,
as a relevant local authority
with the relevant financial policies,
could be in the many hundreds of millions
of dollars in terms of lost, uh, growth levies
and substantial impacts on rates.
So our requests, in terms
of their submission are really, uh, six things.
First of those is to,
to recognize adjoining territorial authorities
where growth is occurring on the periphery
as a relevant local authority.
Secondly, to require boundary adjustments, uh, initiation
and substantial progress in that process
before granting fast rate consents
and urban area, urban edge areas
where they allocate on the periphery of another council
to Third, to enable the panels to recommend boundary changes
to ministers with final approval by an order of council.
Um, fourthly to,
to mandate enforceable cross boundary development
contributions in the form of financial contributions, uh,
as if they were lo levied by their effective council.
Um, fifthly not to extend,
but just to retain the, the original statutory timeframes
to allow popular analysis.
And we are doing extensive pre-consultation engagement
with our fast track applicants, but
nonetheless, the timeframes are still necessary
to enable proper participation.
And, and finally also to preserve consultation rights
and appeal rights for affected councils.
So, um, Madam Chair, we are very supportive
of the legislation, very supportive of the bill,
but we're just seeking these elements to fine tune
to work in a high growth scenario such as ours.
Happy to, to stop and take questions.
Look, thank you very much to you both.
Look, we will give the first question
to Ryan Hamilton from Hamilton.
So, uh, who obviously is vary across the, the great growth
that we're seeing in Hamilton.
Uh, thank you chair, and good to see you Blair,
and congratulations again, Jeff and Maria.
Um, look, yeah, good submission, really clear.
I just wonder if the boundary adjustment could be something
that actually stalls the process in terms of fast track.
If we could mandate enforceable levies in dcs relevant
to the, the new developers, you know, um, catchment
or contribution ahead of boundary adjustment, at least
that would answer your financial burden risk, wouldn't it?
It would certainly take a lot of the pressure away.
Um, uh, Ryan, yes, that's correct.
I think at the end of the day, we would like
to also see some commitment towards the boundary change
process, but the, the most immediate risk is the
financial risk you describes. Yep.
I think you notice of motion
or having it by order of counsel is, is a smart move.
But I just wonder if that could also be a secondary factor
provided the infrastructure funding and levies.
I think that you, you're right.
I think that needs to be signaled at the, at the start.
I think our suggestion possibly is also that,
that the relevant, as the EPAY considers these,
can they get some comfort or assurance that the councils are
progressing towards that boundary change process.
That would be other part to it completed,
but certainly some evidence that it's starting
to head that direction would be helpful.
Thanks. Thank you. Uh, now we'll go
to Cameron Luxton. Thank
You, you chair. Thank you,
Hamilton, for this submission.
You're not the only council to have raised this,
uh, as an issue.
I think we're about to hear from toga city council this
afternoon with a similar issue.
Is there a way, uh, that we,
how do you think we could best define a relevant authority
when the fast track application isn't in their area, uh,
in a, in a clean way?
Does it need to be a boundary that's attached?
Does it need to be infrastructure that runs, uh,
that gonna be required?
Is there a way we can come up with a, a, a way
of making sure that relevant authorities are defined,
but not so loosely that it's, you know, two councils over,
or a development that's happening on the far side
of one council area that a council, uh,
neighboring on the other side wants to have a say on?
How, how do you think we could come up with a definition?
I think you've probably started to head there, um, uh,
Cameron, in terms of your suggestions, where it's a sort
of a contiguous urban area, um, that, that, that,
that a boundary really just becomes an artificial line
or where the infrastructure, um,
that the fast track area is looking
to rely on is effectively coming from
another local authority.
I think there are some strong leads as to the definition.
So if I look at the Hamilton circumstance,
the areas we talk about
for all intents purposes are an expansion
of Hamilton City Council.
They'll act as a contiguous urban area.
Um, so, so I think there is a strong indicator.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, and Celia Wade Brown.
Uh, just one last question.
Thank you. It's really on the boundary issue also.
Um, presu,
I was looking at the Green Hill example on your map
that was extremely helpful to share the map.
Um, presumably you would expect y Catto district
to still be able to have some input, even if potentially
the greater cost might be
for Hamilton Council Soly.
Is it one or the other, or is it both?
No. So, um, just to give you some confidence,
we are approaching all our fast track in a joined up manner
with all the relevant councils in the area.
So through he, we are future Proof growth partnership.
Um, so, so Waco a district council, ourselves,
the regional council, WA,
we're all joined up together with Iwi.
Uh, and, and even if Hamilton was through an amendment
identified as the relevant local authority, we would want
to work with Waikato because until the boundary changes
of indeed the boundary changes,
they are still the jurisdictional authority in that area
until such change occurs.
So, um,
but there are many, many, um, as I say, challenges
outside fast track, around rating, development, levies, um,
communities of interest, all sorts of things, which suggests
that, that those urban expansion areas, um,
probably should most likely form part of the city over time.
Thank you very much for your submission today.
A really thorough submission,
some really interesting considerations there.
So appreciate your insights, um,
and yeah, good work on, uh, on Hamilton.
So thank you. Thank you, thank you.
So we will now, uh, move to our next submitter, the Tookie,
Tookie Water Security Limited
and Water Holdings, Hawkes Bay Limited,
Uh, Kyoto, Madam Chair, members of the,
um, hang on.
Okay, Kyoto, Madam Chair, members of the, um, committee,
um, I should be being joined by Mr. Mike Peterson,
who is the, um, chairman of Tookie Tookie Water Security.
There he is. Um, I'll hand over to Mike
to make some introductory comments
and then, um, briefly focus on the key issues from
Out. Yeah. Well, welcome James
and Mike.
I think we just kind of dropped off there for a minute,
but, uh, yeah, you have 10 minutes with us,
so we'll hand over to you for the opening remarks.
Thank you Chair Catherine.
And, um, thank you to the Honorable
members for hearing us today.
Uh, just by way of introductions,
I think you've got James Winchester,
myself representing Toki, Tookie Water Security Limited
and Water Holdings, Hawkes Bay.
Um, look, we're really pleased to be able to submit, um,
for this Fast Track Amendment.
Uh, bill, um, just to bring you up to speed,
Tookie Tookie Water Security Project.
It's a water storage project in Hawke's Bay, uh,
that is looking to store water, uh,
and use it during times when it's scarce to help
with environmental flows, community water, uh,
and then higher value, uh, food processing and production.
We are listed on Schedule two of the Fast Track, uh, act,
and so we are speaking with some real, uh, world, um,
experience with what's happening
as we go through this process.
Um, just just wanna point out that we are working with Mano.
I heard the earlier submission working with Mano
and Iwi directly on this project,
and we have been for the last, um, uh, four
or five years that we've been going.
And, um, and we are also currently at the moment working
with Doc on a land exchange, uh, that would enable us
to submit a sub substantive application, uh,
for Fast Track approval, uh,
for our Schedule two listed project.
Um, some of you, uh,
I'm sure are all aware about the process, but
before we can submit a substantive application, we have
to get, um, the Land Exchange complete through, uh, doc,
through the director general for recommendation from them.
And, uh, and that is quite a time consuming process we would
like to comment on just at the end, Catherine,
I just justify, um, just would point out, um, look,
we are largely supportive of this amendment's, uh, bill, uh,
and particularly, uh,
we think it's appropriate and justified.
Um, and it, we are neutral as far
as the bill's concerned on the provisions specifically
for the grocery sector.
Um, but we're fully supportive of all other aspects
to make the fastball a fast track act, uh,
what we think should be more fit for purpose
and consistent with the objectives
and intent to get fast track projects underway.
Um, there are two aspects, um, where we do support
and request consideration of change.
Um, one of them is in the port, uh, project description
and the port of towering a case,
and James will talk about that shortly in more detail.
Uh, but it is highlighted by our,
our own real life experience where we were given, uh,
very little, uh, opportunity to have input to the,
to the actual description of our project on Schedule two,
um, when the Fast Track Act was initially passed.
And so there are some aspects of our project
that we would like to explore, uh,
particularly say in improving environmental outcomes.
Uh, but we're worried that if it's not listed on,
she listed on the description on Schedule two, uh, then
that may not be able to be applied.
Um, projects change and evolve,
and we think it's really important
that there's some flexibility.
There's no intent to go beyond the scope of
what the project, um, is broadly outlining,
but we think that requires change.
The second aspect that we, we'd like you
to really think about is to repeal some aspects
of the Fast Track, uh, act.
And, and James would go into more detail,
which create unnecessary burdens for projects.
Um, we are finding that with the Dock Land Exchange, uh,
we're effectively having to go
through the same process we would've previously had to do.
Um, it is a long and drawn out and complex process.
Um, we think these are issues
that should be covered under the Fast Track Act itself, um,
but feels like to us that we're having
to do effectively a mini fast track application just
to get the land exchanged through Dock, um,
and then have to submit,
submit the full fast track application itself
once we get that secure.
And we think that's time consuming.
It's unnecessary, and, and it doesn't shortcut the process,
but it adds real time, uh, resource
and cost at this part of the project.
James, if you wouldn't mind, I'm happy just to pass to you
to co cover off some things in a bit more detail.
Yes, thanks, Mike. Um, I'll, I'll be pretty quick.
Um, the, hopefully the submission, um, is, uh, well,
it's largely taken as read the,
the two points Mike has mentioned.
Um, the first, and,
and the key focus of interest
for Tookie Tookie water security is, um,
the proposed new section 1 1 7 A, which enables changes
to the schedule two project descriptions.
Um, and this is done through an order and council process.
Um, this is what's proposed in the bill.
It's supported as a proportionate
and sensible way of addressing essentially, um, uh,
scope problems which have been demonstrated by the Port
of toga high court case, um, inaccurate
or, um, potentially incomplete project descriptions, uh, uh,
don't necessarily match up with the information or
provided to the drafters of the legislation
and create, um, significant legal risks.
So there, there needs to be a mechanism to address that.
Um, we are already experiencing with, um,
the Tookie Tookie project, um, as it evolves
and the, uh, necessary information is developed
that there may be scope issues.
So, um, that that is a positive amendment that is supported
on on the second point, um,
I think it falls into the category
of an unintentional outcome with the drafting of, of the ACT
as, um, as it currently stands.
And this relates to, um,
the LA the preliminary land exchange process,
which is a mandatory preliminary process, um,
involving engagement with the Department of Conservation.
Um, essentially there's a, there's a bunch
of cross references in the legislation starting in
section 33.
And, um, they take you through a chain back to section
14 of the act, which requires in terms
of your mandatory information
for a land exchange application,
which is focused only on conservation values for you to,
to essentially cover all of the necessary information
or a substantive fast track application.
So you're going well beyond the scope of issues of, um,
concern and interest
to the director general of conservation.
And, um, it is, uh, time consuming.
It is, um, expensive
and largely adds nothing to the process
because you still have the opportunity
and the necessity to address all those mandatory factors
in your substantive application.
So our suggestion is, um, a repeal
of section 33 1 B of the act as it exists,
which excises the problem,
it's a surgical removal,
but it doesn't actually, um,
have any knock on effect in terms of the operation
of the rest of the act.
Um, at least on, on my analysis, I may be wrong,
but, um, that that is the solution that we've identified.
So thanks for your time and happy to have any questions.
Look, thanks James and Mike.
We've got time for a couple of quick questions.
We'll start with Rachel Brooking.
Oh, thank you. Look, I'm just curious about the comments
made about the, uh, listed project
and how there wasn't very much time
from when you gave details to drafters for, uh,
that being put in the bill at the committee stage
of the fast track approvals now Act.
Uh, do you think sometime for that have gone to have gone
to select committee would've helped?
Well, some form of process, um,
Rachel would've been useful, uh, in terms of, um,
having an ability to check project descriptions.
So to the extent they could have been included in a further
draft of the bill and, and, and be able to be checked
and scrutinized that probably may have assisted.
Um, but it was,
it was essentially it went into a black box and out it came.
And the project description was what you got?
Yes, we weren't, we weren't very pleased about it either.
Well, I think, I think to the port of Ong, um,
court cases illustrated that you need to be quite specific,
um, or you, you could be punished
for being quite specific about some aspects in the
description and, and,
and if, maybe if, um, some of those projects had known
that they, they would've been a little more, um,
broad in their description
to encompass a variety of options.
Uh, look, thank you. I might jump in
and, uh, ask a, a, a question is that local MP
for Hawke's Bay and, and knowing the region really well
and knowing that, uh, we need water storage.
We can't grow what we, uh,
currently grow along grow anymore.
Um, and obviously with more droughts and drier summers, um,
but of course it takes a lot of skills
and capability to, uh, you know, uh,
bring forward water storage projects.
We don't do many of them in New Zealand.
So I suppose having the ability to kind
of change the scope slightly as the project goes along,
how beneficial is that to, uh,
building this type of infrastructure?
Well, it's, it's critically important.
Um, 'cause as we go through this process, you you'd note,
Catherine, that, um, you know, there are all sorts
of people now looking to see whether we could help provide
some, uh, water security for other parts of the region.
Uh, so that that part of, of
what we're looking into at the moment is not included in the
scope as an example on, on schedule two.
So, um, there are opportunities
to make this more commercially viable.
Uh, there are opportunities
to make this a truly regional initiative, um,
that may not be able to be considered if some
of these changes aren't adopted.
And, um, just we did hear from the ports earlier
and, you know, some of the economic impact
and benefit of some of these decisions.
I mean, could you quantify that with the,
with the Tookie Tookie Water Security Project?
Um, look, the, the earlier workings,
and this is back from 2017,
demonstrated good significant economic returns
for the region of 300 million.
If we, uh, we are now looking at, um,
some other opportunities within the region, uh,
and so we're talking about prosperity for the region here.
And if this is a truly regional initiative
and does deal with the environmental
and social implications of water shortages,
particularly in some of our townships
and communities, uh, as well as providing
for high value food production
and processing, uh, then that has
to be a great outcome for this region.
Thank you. Look, we'll just pop back to Rachel
for one last question.
Thanks. And this is, uh, to James.
You were telling us about the land exchange process
and you've suggested a change there.
Um, how long do you think it would take drafters to look at,
look into this issue that you've proposed?
I know you've noted that you think you've got it right,
but I presume that you'd want some other analysis to happen.
Um, it, it's quite a discreet change, um, Rachel,
so I think it, it could be looked at relatively swiftly
and if there was some consequential drafting required or,
or was considered to leave a gap, it,
it's not a difficult drafting exercise.
Um, so it's, it is quite a discreet issue.
Mm. PCO takes, uh, at least 10 days.
I'm aware of that. Yes. Yeah.
Thank you very much James
and Mike for your submission today.
We have met time, but some, um, great insights
and analysis there, so appreciate your time,
Kiara, thanks for your time. Thank
You. Thank you.
So we will now move on to our next submission,
uh, the Rivers Group.
Kiara, that was just panic that the screen went black
and everything went quiet, but
We can see you there.
Nikki, welcome to the Select committee.
You have, uh, 10 minutes with us this afternoon,
so we'll hand it over to you.
Brilliant. Thank you very much. And Kiara,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak
to the Fast Track Amendment bill.
My name's Nikki Wood. I'm here today on behalf
of the New Zealand Rivers Group, the Rivers Group,
our technical group
of engineering New Zealand and Water New Zealand.
And hopefully I'm joined by fellow committee member Tom K.
Um, and hopefully you are not surprised that,
that we've made a submission on this bill,
given the substantive changes it makes to the act
and considering the scope of the existing legislation,
there is potential for all sorts of projects
that impact water
and rivers from dams impeding river flow, um,
to increase demand for water supply from changing land uses
that increase flood risk
or the, the pollution of aquatic environments.
That's, that's where we're coming from.
Um, I'll take our submission as red.
I want to make a a couple of points to you
and then leave plenty of time for questions.
So just to demonstrate, some of our concerns
with the changes proposed in the bill,
firstly is the balance of benefits, priorities, and risk.
Um, the proposed amendment risk government policy statements
that prioritize economic growth over a river's ability
to sustainably support, development and growth.
Um, this could be disregarding flood risk
or the loss of ecological habitat
or pollution, which would impact on drinking water sources,
both human and for livestock.
Um, and in the same vein is that the risk that benefits
provided by a river, such as the provision of drinking water
or recreation and tourism, your,
your family's favorite swimming hole, um,
irrigation flood retention
and that cultural significant of water
for all New Zealanders could be discounted
or ignored in decision making under the proposal.
So these benefits all have significant market
and no market value,
but the bill risks these benefits being disregarded
and left outta decision making.
Secondly, we're concerned about the,
the further shutting out of groups
and individuals from the process limiting a panel's ability
to seek input from expert bodies such as ourselves, along
with the proposed reduction in timeframes afforded
to the panels to make decision risks.
Complex fast track projects
that do require deeper consideration,
having unintended consequences
and outcomes which see a worsening of the environment
or put communities in livelihoods at greater risk.
And lastly, we're concerned with the potential screening of,
of pan of panel members by applicants, um,
and the extensive powers that this bill gives to members
to issue direction to EPA
and to change projects listed in the act.
Um, a lot of these points of,
of being covered by submitters.
So I'll leave those that,
but I want to finish focusing on, on one change
that in the bill that we do see that has potential, um,
the new section 84 a conditions relating to infrastructure,
um, as proposed this clause would allow a panel
to set conditions to ensure
that infrastructure in a project area is
or will be adequate to support the project.
So we're commending this clause for taking into account the
and interdependencies of, of infrastructure provision.
Um, it will allow future proof decision making
of resilient infrastructure and communities.
So what, why we like it, what what it means is
that if a large housing development were proposed in a
lowland area behind an existing stock bank,
this clause would require
and allow the panel to consider whether
that stock bank provides sufficient flood protection
for the proposed development.
And this query might show that to manage flood risk,
the stock banks need to be strengthened or heightened, um,
or space identified elsewhere in catchment
to allow flood detention
or maybe, uh, more appropriately
that the clause could deter problematic placement of housing
or industry or infrastructure in the first place.
So this clause could result in, in significant, um,
set cost savings in the long run, which like it,
and we know that avoiding new development
and infrastructure in high risk areas is the cheapest,
most effective, um, method for saving lives
and livelihood and infrastructure.
Um, and the, the clause would allow, um,
will require assessment of a, an ability
to supply drinking water to a development
or, um, of a wastewater network
and treatment plant To have capacity to manage sewer, um,
from a new development
and such a clause would've helped avoid the,
the ongoing sewage overflows
that are impacting oyster farmers, um, in Herrani Harbor.
Um, and there's also a nice commonality
to the spatial planning requirements
that we're expecting in the forthcoming RMA legislation.
Um, in conclusion to protect our clean green,
pure reputation and deliver improvements.
Any fast track amendments must pragmatically
and prudently balance the protection
of the water environment, risk, affordability,
and achievability.
Many of the proposed amendments do not do this,
and we ask,
they're considered carefully happy to take questions.
Thank you, Nikki, for that submission.
Uh, we will go to Celia Wade Brown for a question.
You, Nikki, good to you.
Thank you for bringing your engineering expertise
and your knowledge about water.
Um, I really wanted
to dive into your comments about the
water storage scheme
and how you think that this amendment bill will also,
um, problematically limit the information that's in front
of the panel, let alone in front of the public.
I am not across, um, Ang, but I'm gonna
Oh, so, so Comment,
Just to make a correction there too, Celia,
it is the Water Tookie Tookie Water Security Project.
That's the official name of the, of the,
Um, I was referring to what was in the submission.
Madam Chair. Yes, thank you.
Can I ask a different question of Nikki then please?
Um, with the unfettered ministerial opportunity
to write a GPS, do you think they're going
to be focused on the benefits of clean water
and reduced flooding,
or do you think they're going to be focused on the benefits
to corporate profit?
Um, I can't possibly put words in minister's mouths,
but just, um, I would like to think that
all all values, benefits, considerations, challenges are,
are taken into account.
Um, but given the, this government,
the coalition government's, um, focus on, on growth
and removing regulatory burdens, I would be, yes,
I would hope to see that that clean water
for all is considered
Brilliant. Thank you
very much for your submission today, Nikki.
Uh, it appears we have no further questions.
Uh, thank you for your insights and analysis.
Uh, we appreciate your consideration, so thank you.
Good, thank We will now move on
to our next submitter New Zealand Fish and Game.
And we can see fish and game there.
Uh, you may just need to accept the panelist prompt, uh,
that will bring you through.
Yes, I accepted that
and my camera's not coming up. I'm not sure
Why we can hear you. Yes.
Yep. We just can't see you at this point.
Oh, here, it's given me a start my video now. Sorry.
Oh, there we go. Welcome, welcome
to the Select Committee this afternoon.
Uh, you have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand over to you
for your opening introductions,
but take your submission as read.
Thank you. I'm Helen Brosnan,
senior Policy Advisor from New Zealand Fish and Game,
and I thank you for the opportunity to speak here today.
So as you've already said, I'll take the submission as read,
but I would like to highlight a couple of key points.
I'm not gonna go into the points
that many submitters have made about the appropriateness
or not of the bulk of the amendments.
Um, I'm gonna focus on fish and game issues here today,
but my fullest submission does speak
to all those issues as well.
I'd just like to also reiterate that Fish
and Game is a statutory manager for sports fish
and game birds under the Conservation Act.
This includes a statutory function to advocate for hunting
and angling values and the habitats
that these species live in.
Our income from fishing
and game bird hunting is in the order of 11.5 million.
And we use this to manage angling
and hunting opportunities as well as promoting preservation
of habitat for these species.
I'd just like to mention also that dock isn't mandated
to provide for these species, and we
therefore ask you to provide, ask you to ask us
to provide this expertise in relation
to valued introduced species.
So I just thought I'd make that differentiation upfront.
Uh, so my first point I'd like to make is about fish
and game being a consultee.
We are already asked for comments under section 53, 2, um,
but we would also like to provide comments
for referral applications
and substantive applications relating to, um, habitat,
namely lakes, rivers, and wetlands.
Um, we would also like
to provide comment on complex fish freshwater fishing
activities, freshwater fishing regulations
and wildlife regulations,
and to confirm recreation use of stewarded land prior
to any consideration for disposal or exchange.
So rather than just asking Doc for those comments, we,
we can provide those comments as well in relation
to value to introduced species.
We also, uh, urge you to continue
to leave section 53 3 as is
because this gives an awesome opportunity for other groups
to provide comment to the panel
in relation to freshwater fishing regulations
and the wildlife regulations.
Again, um, we also consider
that the Amendment Act needs to be expanded
to include other freshwater fishing regulations such
as fish facilities, intake fish screens,
and adequate water for fish passages.
Rule issues that were addressed in the recent Genesis
decision down in, um, central South Island, uh,
we'd also like to comment on government policy statements.
We are concerned that depending on
how these policy statements are, how, how they're framed
that they really are gonna lead
to not the panels not being able to find options
for refusing consents.
And we think that that is an issue in itself.
We also urge you to amend the, the cost recovery regulations
so that we are a also able to cost recover,
uh, feel like I've said a few negative things here,
but now I'd like to say something positive.
So we like the spawning protections
and we support the amended wording providing
for further protection relating to disturbance
of any duration outside the relevant spawning season
to a water body that is known for spawning of trout,
salmon, or native fish.
So my final point I'd like to make,
and this is not something that, um,
I know a whole lot about, but I feel quite strongly about.
So we've added a appendix to our submission on this issue
and it's about bonds decommissioning and compensation.
So the RMA has some provisions in it for bonds.
Uh, there are provisions for decommissioning,
but they're more often than not for offshore oil
and gas, not for mining.
And quite frankly, we do find,
but we don't really do
compensation very well in New Zealand.
I think it's a really big gap in our legislation.
So I urge you to also look at if you are gonna have a piece
of legislation, which is quite frankly very enabling
and very permissive, that you actually need
to be thinking about compensation
and environmental liability insurance
or so that, um, the New Zealand taxpayer doesn't need to pay
for the cleanup when environmental harm occurs.
Okay. So that's, that's, um, my presentation
and I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you very much for that presentation, Helen.
Uh, we will go to Rachel Brooking.
Thanks Helen. Um,
and thank you for those, uh, that appendix on the bonds
and the cleanup and compensation issues.
Um, unfortunately we're unlikely to be able to deal
with them in the very short timeframe.
We are looking at this bill, uh, which is what happens.
Um, but I'm interested also in your experience
with the Fast Track Act so far and whether or not fish
and Game's been involved in any applications.
Um, and I see also your legal opinion on the cost recovery
issue and that you,
it looks like you can't co cost recover under the
current, um, situation.
So just if you could talk around fish
and games current experience
or if you are more thinking about in the future being
involved in how you'll cost recover for that.
Certainly. So firstly,
we have been involved in a few applications.
Um, the Wahi mine, we provided comments to that.
Uh, we, we have also
provided comments to the Homestead Bay, uh,
subdivision application in Otago.
And we are looking to provide comments
to the Bendigo Mine application.
Hence why I'm quite concerned about compensation
and other provisions in a mining framework.
We haven't. Yeah.
So, um, and at this stage,
because we've only got 20 working days,
we haven't had an opportunity where we've had to go for
outside expertise.
We've been able to cover our submissions in-house.
Uh, but we think for the Bendigo mine
or some of those sorts of applications that cost recovery,
especially for, um, review of economic,
economic, um, provisions.
It's sort of a, an area that's
outside our area of expertise.
I mean, we do advocacy
and we do, we have a team of planners, so, and,
and some ecologists.
So there's a lot of work we can do in house,
but when we have to pay for someone out of house, that's,
especially when cost recovery would be really important
to an organization like ours.
Uh, so, but just generally about,
if I can just go a little bit beyond your question,
but generally, um,
the legislation I think is working quite well in
terms of timeframes.
And I'm quite surprised that, uh,
the amendments weren't into this level
of detail on everything
because I don't think you'd necessarily need
to shorten up timeframes, um, make it harder
or exclude more people from providing comments to the panel.
And I don't think you, you need to make it harder
for applications to be refused because sooner
or later the panel will find an application
that they will wanna refuse
and consent conditions cannot provide for everything.
Advice notes can't provide for everything.
And even just sometimes
where an applicant applicant doesn't wanna do something, um,
like I think it was one of the permits, some
of the permits are so easy to get, they take a month,
why wouldn't you just get on with that early on so
that you don't get the wrong design for your fish passage
for your substantive decision?
That is just stupid. So leaving it as a later thing
as an advice note just doesn't make any sense to me.
I probably went a little bit overboard there. Sorry,
By just taking though by advice note, you mean instead
of a consent condition or as part of a consent
Condition, or they might use an advice note
to say you have these outstanding things to do
before you can start work and it might be a wildlife permit
or a fish permit or, or something.
Thanks. Mm,
Thank you Helen.
And thank you for, uh, your submission today.
Uh, you look like you, uh, got a lovely river
behind you there, Helen.
Uh, so thank you. There we go.
There's a bit of rafting going on.
Yes, no, thank you very much, uh, Alan
for your submission today with great considerations for us.
Thank you. So we will now move on
to our next submission today,
the Environmental Defense Society.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. I'm
Just going good afternoon. We
can hear you and welcome to the Select committee.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you.
Thank you. And I'm just checking out my colleague Greg
Severson is online too.
I think I can see him there. Great. I am. Thanks
Jack. Thank you.
Um, my name is Shay Scheffer
and I am the Environmental Defense
Society's Chief Operating Officer.
And with me today is Dr.
Greg Severson, who is Ed S's Reform director.
EDS has been watching implementation
of the Fast Track approvals Act closely since its enactment.
We've actively engaged with various statutory
and nons statutory participants in the system
and have been invited to comment on the TTR project
and the Southland Wind Farm Project.
Pretending that this bill is just about grocery competition
or fixing minor glitches is fooling no one
the submissions you have before you demonstrate that
the bill includes changes
that will have significant ramifications for implementation
of the act, both procedurally
and substantively our submission details, the amendments
that we oppose collectively these changes put the
system at risk.
There is a greater likelihood that decisions will be rushed,
ill-informed, and politically influenced,
ultimately making them less legally defensible
and more readily open to challenge.
Today we focus on what we consider to be two
of the most fundamental issues,
and that is more constrained legal standing in Clause 33
and the ability to issue a government policy
statement in clause five.
Greg will discuss these matters in more detail,
but I have the following observations to make.
First number one, process aspects of
how the act has been implemented have
to date being carried out judiciously
statutory operators have been careful
to implement the act in accordance
with its procedural principles,
whilst also taking into account matters of natural justice.
The right legal questions are being asked
and the right evidence is being tested.
That is not to say
that substantively the ACT is acceptable from an
environmental perspective, we have not yet had a decision
that has tested the decision making framework against a
project that presents significant environmental risk.
ED S'S original concerns with the ACT have not
therefore been appea.
This bill does not make an acceptable law. Unacceptable.
It makes a bad law worse.
Number two, the lack of policy analysis
or regulatory impact assessment underpinning this
bill is unacceptable.
It was astonishing to hear during last week's submissions,
a committee member ask the panel conveners
for some statistics on how the act has been implemented.
This is bread and brought work
that should have been undertaken prior
to this bill being introduced.
In the absence of this information being made available
to the committee, we have undertaken our own analysis of
how panels have exercised their section 53 3 discretion
to invite comments from additional parties
and of decision timeframes.
Greg will talk you through what our analysis shows,
and we have provided a one page spreadsheet
to the committee via email, which we hope will find useful.
Finally, I caution you
to think very carefully about F Clauses five
and 33 specifically,
but also about some
of the other possible changes which submitters have put
forward, including further limiting of legal remedies.
You should be asking yourselves,
are the changes really about delivering fast approvals
or are they actually about providing shortcuts for projects
that are environmentally unsound and that have GBS benefits?
Thank you. And I'll now pass you over to Greg
to talk further about Ed S's two main concerns.
Happy to take questions at the end too. Thanks.
Thanks Jay. And, uh, Koto, uh,
I'll just elaborate on the issue
of standing under the bill first.
So in 2024,
the Fast Track approvals Act weakened public input,
but it at least allows panels
to decide which additional groups would add value and would
therefore be able to comment.
Uh, clause 33 in the bill significantly curtails
that expert independent discretion.
And that approach is deeply flawed
for four specific reasons, which I'll go through now.
Number one, there's no evidence of a problem here. So far.
17 panels have exercised their discretion
to invite comments from additional parties,
and more than half of those ca those cases,
fewer than 10 additional parties have been invited.
Three panels have chosen not
to invite any additional parties at all.
The number of additional parties invited
to comment has not increased over time,
and that really shows that panels remained mindful
of the procedural principles already
in section 10 of the act.
And the reasons for the invitations have also
been very reasonable.
Many have been neighbors, including some
that should have been invited under Section 53, 2 H
as adjacent owners or occupiers,
but were not initially identified as that
others are about ensuring the public interest is represented
because many projects involve effects on public resources
like climate, air, fresh water, and the marine space.
Lots are also, uh, invites to players like NZTA water care
and so forth who hold information
and expertise no one else does, including councils
and whose views, uh, can't be provided by anyone else.
And I really urge the committee
to think very carefully about the following.
Invitations for people to comment are not correlating
to longer decision making timeframes.
So for example, the, the Southland Wind Farm 30 invitations,
but a timeframe of 64 days, the Drury Quarry expansion,
26 invitations,
and yet the shortest decision making timeframe of them all
so far, just 45 days.
So there's simply no evidence that existing discretion
to invite comment from parties is being abused
or used inappropriately.
Uh, secondly, clause 33 would have big effects on the
quality of decisions.
So established NGOs, community groups, iwi, hapu,
and others, like infrastructure providers
have expert knowledge
and a long track record of making decisions more robust
by testing evidence, improving conditions,
or making them workable and limiting their ability.
Uh, limiting panel's ability to invite comments, risks,
vital information not being put before decision makers.
Uh, in many cases, NGO involvement improves conditions
without preventing projects from going ahead.
Uh, so for example, ED S's own involvement in the Southland
Wind Farm Project is not at all about opposing the project.
Uh, only that turbines are moved off the
highly sensitive wetland area.
Uh, thirdly, out of four points, clause 33
misunderstands the role of local government
Councils are elected by voters,
but they don't represent all of their perspectives
or hold all relevant information.
So it's fundamentally wrong
to allow comments only if council doesn't
intend to provide its own.
It's not the gatekeeper
to its community's views or its knowledge.
And finally, clause 33 is just simply unworkable.
Uh, for example, what happens if a council intends
to address a matter, but it doesn't end up actually doing
so, or if it does provide comment
and it's actually insufficient.
So the intention of a council is a bad test
for deciding whether, uh, whether others get to comment.
So the upshot of all of that is that Clause 33, along
with constraints on appeal rights
and so forth, is really likely
to channel people's energy into much slower, more costly
and less constructive judicial review.
And just to note, that's exactly what happened in Ireland.
For fast track housing legislation,
many more decisions ended up being judicially reviewed
and often successfully.
So as of 2022
of the 35 completed JR proceedings, the state
or the developer had been successful in just three of them.
So the lesson is that if you have an artificially rushed
process that excludes people giving really important
information, decisions will be legally
flawed and open to challenge.
And just finally, really quickly, I wanted
to touch on the government policy statement
or GPS, uh, in clause five.
And that will be able to state that certain types
of project are of regional or national benefit,
and that's far away from a technical or machinery change.
And a proper regulatory impact assessment would have
told you that if it existed.
I'll just mention one issue.
So the only way a project can be declined is if its adverse
impacts are sufficiently significant to be out of proportion
to its regional or national benefits.
A GPS could remove the ability for the panel
to independently assess the project's benefits,
skewing the whole calculus of the decision, uh,
and it would bring the act much closer to its original model
where ministers were the ones making decisions.
Uh, and just to conclude, added to that,
there's not even a proper process proposed by which
that GPS is promulgated.
No checks and balances like under the RMA
for national direction, no public consultation.
And it could be very specific referencing, um,
particular sectors like coal mining, parts of the country
where, for example, employment needs to be boosted
or even specific pet project, uh, pet projects.
So, um, thank you, uh, and we're open to questions.
Thank you. Look, we have only got time really
for one question and we'll give it to Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Thanks for that
and for sort of providing a regulatory impact assessment.
I'm interested in this clause five
and just the last point
that you were talking about there, Greg.
Um, because on my, when you look at it, on the face of it,
well this is enabling more projects
to get into the process if there's a, um, GPS,
but really there's so many terrible projects on that, uh,
uh, of the 149 that are on the schedule two,
it doesn't make much difference.
But you are saying, well, it does make a difference
because it actually goes to the substantive decision at, um,
sub six is, is that correct?
Yeah, I'll tackle that one. Shay.
Um, essentially yes, I mean it's, it's relevant at two bits.
One's the referral decision,
but as you say, it's also in the substantive decision
of a panel where it's one
of the very few mandatory considerations that the panel has
to, um, take into account.
Um, and so while
that GPS can't address the the adverse effects assessment,
it can simply state what the assumed national,
regional benefits of a project actually are.
Uh, and, and in doing that assessment of cost benefit, um,
that can potentially skew, uh,
the decision making of the panel.
So it's, it's, it's almost,
it's direct ministerial interference by stealth.
So, Rachel, just to clarify too,
or to add to that, um, this is,
this is basically taking away the independent assessment
of benefits from independent expert panels.
So, um, it's,
it's direct political interference in the substantive
outcome of a decision.
Thank you very much. We are gonna have to leave it there.
Uh, the submission, we have gone well over time
and we have other submitters waiting,
but look, we really appreciate your submission, uh,
a lot in there to consider.
So thank you for your time today.
Thank you. So we will now move on
to our next submission, uh, the Tree Council,
and we can see the Truth Council,
Kiara Koto, Kiara, uh, we can, there we go.
We can see you and we can hear you.
Welcome to the Select Committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you.
Thanks very much for the opportunity.
Um, I really want to underline everything that EDS said,
uh, to you just now.
And really, I'm just going to add, um, a few little bits
and pieces of from our point of view,
but, um, in terms of the technical assessment of the bill,
I, I don't think you're going to get a better technical
breakdown of the issues
and the problems caused by this bill than you are from EDS.
So I urge you to listen to their submission
and to, um, read
what they've put in their full submission carefully.
The Tree Council, uh, strongly opposes this bill.
We think it's completely unnecessary
and that it is, uh, wolf in sheep's clothing, um,
that it is not some, um, technical, um, tweaking.
It is fundamentally taking away the independence
of the panels, um, to make decisions
and opening up, um, the political interference,
direct political interference by ministers,
which was taken out
of the original Fast Track Approvals Act, simply
because there was so much public backlash to that proposal,
and quite rightly too.
Um, so as EDS pointed out, clause five,
it completely usurps proper process,
and it enables government ministers
to make a decision on the national
or regional benefits of a project
without having heard any evidence, um, other than
that from the applicant presumably.
Um, and, and
therefore, um, it gives that project, um, a process
or a lift, if you like, through the process,
which it shouldn't have from the get go
before it is assessed properly
and correctly by the panels themselves.
Um, it, it means that they're not tested,
the benefits are not tested.
There's no submission, um, to, to
say whether those benefits are real or, or imagined
or ex expanded or inflated.
Um, and really it takes away the independence
of those panels by putting a minister's view
on the importance
and the benefits of that project ahead of anything
that the panel is going to see later.
Um, so we'll move on from that one.
The clause 42, um, is also
extremely concerning.
So clause 42 is where a project
as originally scoped can be modified
or massively potentially expanded on
what was originally proposed, um, without being
properly tested through the process.
So the original, um, proposal goes through the panel process
or whatever scope that is,
and then there later can be a modification
that is only approved by the minister, um, to expand that.
So, you know, for example, a mine, um, could be
of a limited area and that goes through the process
and the risks and everything are assessed by the panel
and it's given approval,
and then later the applicant goes back to the minister
and says, oh, actually we need to expand it by 10 times.
And so obviously the, the impact
and the, um, risks would increase massively if
that was the case, but
that decision is not gonna go through the panels.
That's just gonna be left up to the minister.
And we just think that's complete.
Um, underhand, um, use of the idea of modification, um,
to subvert the process.
Um, the idea of constraining timescales further, um,
in terms of the time that the panel has to, um,
assess these projects, some of which will be extremely large
and complex, uh,
is it makes the whole thing really unrealistic
and impractical, and means that the amount of due diligence
that they're able to do in terms of getting the information
that they need to make these decisions
and understanding the depth of the, of that information, um,
will be really constrained.
And it begs the question, are you actually trying
to assess these projects properly
or are you just rubber
stamping them through the panel process?
And it looks like the latter if you constrain the projects,
the timescale that the panels have got
to assess these projects even further in the legislation.
Um, the thing
that really concerns the Tree council though, obviously is,
um, section 53, which is the shutting out
of community NGOs
and other organizations from the panel process
as if it wasn't difficult enough, um,
to have any input into these projects
and whether they should be approved
or not through the original Fast Track Approvals Act.
Uh, because you have to be invited, um,
to basically be a submitter
and there's no public submission process,
then this constraints that even further.
And there is no benefit in that in terms
of getting good decisions.
Um, as you heard from EDS, um, there are many, many examples
where the input from submitters has has improved, um,
consent conditions for projects.
And, you know, I was personally involved in the hya water
treatment plant consenting process through taking it
through the environment court mediation process.
And that resulted in the very first environmentally
protective consent conditions for an ex for the largest, um,
construction project in carry dieback
infected land in the country.
We would not have got that, um, through, well, we didn't get
that through the council consent process,
and there was a massive risk of, of spread of the pathogen
beyond the project site.
You, through the mediation process,
we got some very tight consent conditions, which we hope,
um, will protect the surrounding environment.
Now, you know, you would not have got that
unless through that pub public submission process,
and for us taking it through the
environment court mediation.
So to shortcut that through a fast track
and say that you don't need input from these other
specialists who actually know a dam site more about it than
your applicant does, um,
you're just not going to get a good decision.
You're going to get something that is extremely damaging
to the community, to the environment,
and ultimately to, um, air to a row as resources.
Um, and that's not, that's not a grownup, um, way to d
to deal with really large and challenging pro projects.
They need to at least have been interrogated and questioned
and, and tested properly.
Um, so we don't think that that's a, a, a, a good thing.
And nor do we think it's a good thing
that you can't appeal any of these decisions on points
of law, um, which is clause 50.
That's, you know, that's really arrogance, isn't it?
Uh, we got it right, and you can't tell us we didn't.
Um, uh, you know, this is supposed to be a democracy,
not a dictatorship that we are living in here.
Um, finally,
and here's the other, here's the other real,
real kicker is the corruption, um, the corruption clause
where the applicant will be permitted
to complain about panel members, um,
and prevent their appointment
or interfere in their appointment.
Um, why would you allow that?
Why would you allow that?
The panels must be independent
and you could easily refocus that clause onto conflict
of interest, which is a legitimate concern, obviously,
for any project and for panels and who makes them up.
But allowing a a, an applicant to dictate
who should be sitting on a panel
to make a decision on their project.
It's a small world anyway, in INO and New Zealand.
There's only so many experts.
Um, everybody knows each other.
Let's not shut, shut it down
and make it even more, um, cozy.
It's not a good look.
Um, so in summary, the purpose
of these amendments to this already very challenging
and undemocratic act, um, are
to cut out any opposition to the projects, um,
and to make it a rubber stamping exercise for projects
that have already been deemed important by the minister
constraining the timescales, saying who can present evidence
and even the makeup of panels is all in order
to prevent independent scrutiny of these projects.
Um, it is anti-democratic and it invites corruption.
And this bill should be thrown out,
and we hope that, um,
this committee will be recommending that back to the house.
Thank you.
Look, thank you very much for your very thorough, um,
insightful submission today.
Uh, we have met time, uh,
and we have other submitters waiting,
but we do appreciate your time, um,
and the time you've put into that submission.
So thank you very much.
So we will now welcome through our next submitter, the
Toga City Council.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
Then we can see you, uh, mahi.
Uh, welcome to the select Committee this afternoon.
And Andrew, uh, you have 10 minutes with us, so, uh,
we'll hand it over to you
to talk us through your submission. Thank you.
And thank you very much. Uh, Catherine.
Uh, so just, just wanna submit
that overall we support more efficient planning processes
to the RMA, such as fast track.
However, fast track needs to provide meaningful input
and involvement of impacted parties.
This is currently an issue
and exa exasperated, uh, by the, uh, proposed amendments,
especially in relation
to cross-border development proposals.
These being developments in one council's jurisdiction
that rely on infrastructure
provided by an adjoin adjoining council.
There is currently one large fast track proposal,
which is in Raki South in the Western Bay of Plenty, uh,
district, uh, but right on Targa City Council's border
that relies on connections to Targa City's infrastructure.
Uh, for approximately 3000 homes
and 50 hectares of business land,
it would effectively become a new suburb of tga.
Uh, but one, um, TCC has no jurisdiction over.
While we are currently working collaboratively
with our partner council
and the developer, uh, TCC is not defined
as a relevant territorial authority.
And this effectively cuts us out of the process.
Uh, we seek the definition of relevant, uh,
territorial authority to be amended to rectify this issue.
Further, TCC cannot charge development contributions rates
IFF levies and other fees
and charges, hence why we'd want to, uh, enable connections,
um, uh, sorry, hence why we may, uh, want to withhold, uh,
connections, uh, to our infrastructure.
And this is not a good result for either party.
The legislation needs to ensure growth pays for growth,
both in terms of infrastructure, CapEx, uh, costs, as well
as the ongoing costs.
The process needs to ensure
that fast track developments do not undermine the existing
and plan developments
by cannibalizing limited infrastructure capacity.
Uh, this is a real risk, uh, in this situation.
Uh, the infrastructure costs are not trivial.
Uh, given the proposed scale of the W South development,
it would generate significant, uh, infrastructure demand.
If the, um, if it were in the TCC district,
it would attract over a hundred million
of development contributions and recognition of this.
The infrastructure funding matters are a substantial gap,
and without it being addressed, may compromise the ability
of some fast track projects being able to proceed.
We note the proposed addition
of a new section on infrastructure, uh, conditions,
which is section, uh, 84 A, this is a start,
but in our view is insufficient.
Uh, TCC seeks amendments to include cross-border application
of local government funding tools like rates, IFF levies
and development contributions
and requirement for an independent panel to be satisfied
that cross boundary funding issues both capital
and operational are satisfactorily addressed,
taking into account the views of impacted local authorities
before approvals are granted.
So that's all I have to say.
I'll hand over to, um, Andrew, if he's got any, any
addition, just,
Just very quickly 'cause we'll save some time
for questions, but, um, I, I did just listen
to the Hamilton City Council, uh, submission and,
and our, I guess our views
and issues are very closely aligned with the, um,
what they face over there.
Thank you very much.
Uh, look, we've got the first question from Cameron Luxton.
Thank you chair, and Andrew, I city council this issue,
and, uh, I think we can work something there.
The question I have, uh, around the infrastructure, you told
that share infrastructure, um, quite well
if it was to move into a CC and that to be dev. Uh,
Just Cameron, I'm just gonna jump in there
because your audio is really distorted.
Is it? You might just wanna move away from the
microphone or do something.
Oh,
Rocky's this going. Maybe if I just
Yell's better, that's better. There we go.
Okay. Um, the question I had was about, uh, A CCO
that is in the making between, uh, what Western Bay plenty
and TGA City Council.
How do you think that, um,
should be addressed in the legislation?
Uh, and also to the question asked of, uh,
Hamilton City Council, how do you think an adjoining council
or an interested council
or a relevant council, um, should be defined?
Should it be based on infrastructure sharing
or based on proximity?
Uh, I, I guess my answer to that is, uh,
the CCO will solve some of the waters issues.
Um, but I do note that initially we're gonna ring fence, uh,
that the, uh, the assets, so that is going to,
to still create some, uh, issue, uh, as to, um, I think, uh,
as the second question is around proximity.
Uh, because even if, if it was all, uh,
Western Bay infrastructure, uh, you know, you still have
to come onto TCC roads
and this community, uh, facilities, et cetera, which,
which will be used by those, um, by those residents.
So, you know, it's, it's something we don't want
to be stopping development,
but, uh, we certainly want to, to have some sort of say
or some seat at the table as, as we're,
we're discussing this.
Sure. And can I just ask, uh, further to that, you,
you mentioned the, um, boundary changes, I mean, the history
of the way the boundary was created in this part
of the world with, um, Mike Patar
and other, uh, leaders of the day flying
around in helicopters, drawing lines.
How do, what sort of relevancy do you think, uh, how,
how much, how much, uh,
objection do you think there would be
to changing the boundaries of TTCC in regards
to Western Bay of Plenty?
Do you think there'd be much pushback to that?
Uh, yeah. Well, I, I guess there's,
we've worked pretty closely together
and done a lot of boundary alignments over the years.
Um, however, I think, uh, there's, there's a simple solution
and that's, um, that's, uh, putting the,
the two councils together,
you'll solve all these issues altogether.
I thought, oh, thought Bob Owen might have
had something to do with it in the day too.
Anyway, carry on.
Uh, we, we'll now, uh, go to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, chair. Um, you might
have just answered that question.
Um, mahi around the two councils joining together,
if they joined with that encompass all of your, uh,
infrastructure, you know, development proposals that sit
outside your current council,
or would there still be some development on the edge
of your council that would still be a bit of an orphan?
Uh, in, in our situation, it would solve 99% of the issue.
Um, because between the two regions
where we're quite distinctly different,
there's some quite clear boundaries, uh, fairly well from,
from, you know, the Western Bay boundary to the,
the next councils. Yeah,
There's only one council that adjoins terrorist city
council, which is Western Bay.
Okay, cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, look, I might jump in and ask a question
because we have heard, uh, quite extensively
through the submission process around the port of toga.
Um, and obviously the issues they're facing there
with the expansion of the wharf, um,
and, uh, sending ships away, uh,
given you are such a large export region as well, I mean,
how concerning is this, um, as a council to you?
I think, um, you know, the, the driver
of the economy here is, is the port of toga.
And so, um, having a, a, a lack of, uh, of space and,
and constraint around, uh, capacity is, is a, um, is a, a,
a real problem for both the region and I think the country.
Absolutely. And do you, could you quantify it all, kind
of the economic impact, um, that, that, um, you know,
hold up in consenting is having, um,
on the export region of Ong?
Um, I think so at the moment, um, we've been able to,
to sort of work within that, um, you know,
within that constraint.
Uh, but you know, going forward, uh, it,
it will be significant
because, you know, we're, we're pretty much at,
at full capacity where we, we can't take more.
Um, and as I say, I think from a New Zealand Inc perspective
as well as, as a tolling perspective, it's,
it's not a, a good place to be.
So I'd say up until this point, um,
apart from obviously the, the money that has been spent
by the port, uh, to, to try to, uh, to get this,
this development done, um, you know,
there isn't necessarily a big impact,
but going forward, uh, the longer this takes, uh,
it's gonna have more and more impact on a yearly basis.
Thank you for your submission today
and your time and your insights.
Um, and yeah, it's great to see the, the growth
of toga as well.
So, uh, thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Katherine.
Always growing. Catherine, it's a great place to be.
Yeah. Um, right.
I think, uh, we've got our next submitter online, uh,
Carter Group Limited,
I can't say it yet.
Hang on.
Good afternoon. How are you?
Good afternoon. Welcome
to the Select committee this afternoon.
Uh, look, you've got 10 minutes with us,
so we'll hand it over for your opening remarks.
Hi, I'm Tim Carter from the Carter Group,
and I've got my legal, um,
representatives here as well. Um,
My name's Joe Ard from Anderson Lloyd in Christchurch, uh,
and Meg Davidson, also with Anderson Lloyd.
Um, so very simply, our, um,
submission is really focused on infrastructure constraints,
um, and in our view, so we're,
we're a developer in Christchurch.
We've got three listed projects.
We have, um, lodged one of our listed projects, Ryan's Road,
which we're making progress with.
There's two of our other projects
that we have not lodged applications yet.
And the primary reason that we haven't is due to how the,
um, fast track legislation currently, um,
and how it's the proposed amendment Bill,
unfortunately doesn't help us, how it deals
with infrastructure complaint, uh,
infrastructure constraints,
and our view, almost all land development,
fast track applications have some, require some form
of in infrastructure improvement that is beyond the control
of applicants because it will often be,
or al almost always, um, will be on public land, um,
to be completed by infrastructure providers,
including councils.
Um, and this creates a real problem
in terms of the, the certainty
of the fast track applications in our view,
because if the councils
or the infrastructure providers aren't willing to compete,
compete those infrastructure upgrades, then they can argue
that the lack of infrastructure is a reason
for those applications to be declined.
Um, that's exactly the case in two of our applications
that we have not lodged yet.
One in particular, we know the downstream effects
of our subdivision will result in the requirement
for line marking on an intersection.
Very minor cost, very easy work to do.
Um, but if the council is of a mind not to do that work,
and we understand they are, they can then argue that
that is a reason to turn down our development
because it will create a unsatisfactory traffic, um,
safety issue that could be very easily solved.
And the cost of that line marking can easily be recovered
by development contributions.
Um, so the new 84 a, um,
condition in, as part of the amendment's bill
that we believe is to address this, doesn't really help us
because, um, in our view,
although the panel it's proposing, the panel may, um,
may put conditions, um, to ensure that,
um, infrastructure, um, will be adequate
to support the development putting conditions on, on us
as the applicants doesn't really solve it
because we are not the people
who control the upgrade of the infrastructure.
It's the infrastructure providers and councils.
Um, so we have made two minor, uh, amendments
and that is, um, we, we, one of them in 84 a,
we are suggesting that the panel should be able to ensure
that infrastructure providers, um, have sufficient time
to allow the infrastructure to be upgraded, um,
rather than ensure that the infrastructure is upgraded.
It's a very minor point,
but it makes a world of difference to our application.
And I believe for all other land development
fast track applications.
Do you want me to say, um, yes.
So if I could just, um, help with this.
We think the intention is good.
We think the drafting is problematic.
The simple reality is
that conditions can only be set which
relate to the applicant.
Um, the panels can't set conditions requiring infrastructure
providers to do anything.
So the, the best that they can do is say, um,
this project will proceed on date x, um,
and the applicant can't proceed before that date
and have a date that allows those infrastructure providers
enough time, um, to get their act together effectively.
Um, but the way it's drafted at the moment
just does not work.
'cause the conditions will only ever bite on the applicant
and they have no ability to, um,
make the infrastructure adequate
because they don't own the land.
They can certainly provide the money,
but if there's an unwilling council,
the council will just say, no, we will not do it.
Um, and then the project is rendered and it can't proceed.
Um, the amendments that we have suggested, um,
are really just to make it clear that all we're asking
for is that an infrastructures provider is
provided with time to do what they,
um, they should be doing.
And of course, the costs of that won't be an issue
'cause they'll be recovered from the developer.
And that, um, that that is the limit effectively
of the condition that can be put on, um, the applicant.
And we've also suggested an amendment to 85,
which is just as important.
Um, a new 85 4 A that says where there is this type
of condition, which gives an infrastructure provider
adequate time to do whatever upgrade needs to be done, um,
where that sort of condition is there, then
that is not a reason for declining the project.
Um, so those two amendments are pretty key
because at the moment, the way it's drafted it,
it's almost more of a hindrance and a help.
We'd rather it wasn't there. Um,
and I don't think that was the intention.
Thank you very much for that submission.
Look, we've got a couple of questions, so we'll go
to Rachel Brooking first.
Thank you. Uh, now you may
or may not be aware that the select committee has decided
to report back very soon to the house,
and that won't give, uh, time
for parliamentary drafting and for changes.
So I'm wondering, is your preference that the bill go
through as it's drafted
or that it doesn't go through with it
because the changes are necessary?
Um, I think we would prefer it did go through,
but we are gonna have to rely on commentary, if you like,
about what the intention of the new section 84 A is.
Um, so I'd have to rely pretty heavily on that
because the way it's drafted at the moment,
just in its blunt form, it can cut both ways.
So we'd need some clarification that it's intended
to be in the help category, not in the hindrance category.
That that's the best I think we
could do in the circumstances.
Thank you. Could you just, uh, further elaborate on
that 84 and 85 in terms of practical terms?
Um, in, in terms of the actual project itself and,
and how you I think that it's a hindrance.
Yeah. So, um, let, let's just provide an example
of the type of condition that requires,
let's say a roundabout, um, upgrade, um, a condition.
The best that could be put on there would've be condition
that says, um, this, um, you, you,
you can't put a condition on that requires NZTA
or the council or anything to upgrade a, a roundabout
because that the consent relates to the applicant.
So a condition requiring an infrastructure
provided to do something would be ultra via illegal
and would've no impact at all.
So what the, um, applicant ends up with is a consent
that says you can't proceed with your subdivision
until this roundabout is upgraded.
And then NZ TL council goes, well,
when it's not gonna do it,
so your project's not gonna proceed.
Um, so the best that can be done is a condition
that says this project will proceed on X date.
Um, and it's going to go ahead whether NZTA
or the council do that upgrade or not, then effectively.
And that, that acts as leverage effectively to ensure
that within that timeframe, NZTA
or the council does do that upgrade
or else the project is gonna built be built without
that upgrade having occurred.
Now, obviously you do have to provide some reasonable time
to allow them to do that, and they do get the funding from
the developer, but that's about the best
that can be done in the circumstances.
Thank you. No, that's really helpful.
Uh, look, we have time
for one last question from Mike Davidson.
Thank, thank you. I I just wanna unpack that slightly
because it seems like it's gonna put a lot of pressure on
councils to actually, I guess,
who have quite a big infrastructure, um, strategy to then
do things that are currently not within it just
to meet the developers needs and
therefore other priority projects might get sacrificed
because of that point. Um,
That, that is why we've suggested in the wording that, um,
the panel may set conditions to ensure
that the infrastructure provider is allowed sufficient time.
So we are assuming the money is there from the developer.
So it's not a, it's not a money constraint
and that what the infrastructure
provided is allowed a sufficient time to get
that infrastructure there.
So that would be the safeguard.
They've got the money and, um,
we can't have an unrealistic timeframe.
So that's just something the panel would need
to think about is how long would need to be allowed.
But what we don't want it to be as a complete veto
where they say, well, we'll just never do it.
Um, so your project falls over and, and,
And most, in most of these cases, I think that the,
the infrastructure requirements will be quite minor.
You know, for one of our subdivisions,
it's painting lines on an intersection.
It shouldn't take a lot of time
and it will be funded by development contributions,
but you, the, we can't have a condition on us saying
that we will paint those lines
'cause it's not our intersection
and it's just providing the councils our amendment.
It's providing the councils enough time
to paint the lines on the intersection
and for them to do their jobs.
Look, thank you very much for your submission today.
Uh, very insightful, uh, appreciate your time. Thank you.
Thank you. So we will now move on
to our next submitter lo Arlene,
who should be with us shortly.
Welcome lo to the select committee this afternoon.
You have five minutes with us, so we'll hand it over to you,
Jorah. Um, my
name is Lo
and I do climate activism with several organizations,
but today I am speaking for myself as someone
who lives here in ROA
and wants to continue living here for a long time.
Um, and you may be tempted to roll your eyes
and dismiss me as a dramatic greenie,
but I hope that you can take just five minutes
to actually listen
because so many other people feel the same as I do,
and it's your job to listen to us.
So let me be clear, this bill would make climate change
significantly worse in a critical time when we need
to be doing everything we can possibly do to make it better.
In Golden Bay, locals are terrified that their beautiful
and sacred awa would be poisoned
by arsenic byproducts during gold mining.
Under the fast track,
this would have devastating impacts on the local community
and economy as it would also poison the farmland and fish
and increased Golden Bay's dependence on a single
extractive industry.
In Westport, where I've done a lot of work
to protect Denison Plateau from a fast track coal mine
expansion, I've talked to a lot of locals who want
to keep their jobs in coal mining,
but their town is now flooding so much that they're going
to have to move inland and rebuild it entirely.
Their livelihoods are dependent on coal, the very thing
that is also threatening their wellbeing.
But do you think they'll have financial security when the
mines run dry and their houses are underwater?
And that's not just me being dramatic.
Our neighbors in tolu are currently facing unknowable pain
as their home literally disappears underwater.
Scientists estimate that hundreds of thousands
of people are already dying each year globally due
to climate change, exacerbated events and conditions.
And we just had a climate related death in Wellington
where a GP was killed by a falling tree
during abnormally intense nationwide windstorms,
but not a single mainstream news source made the connection
that this death was due to climate change
and it was preventable.
The Paris Agreement said that 1.5 degrees
of warming was dangerous, but a reasonable compromise.
While we're already at 1.5 degrees of warming
and on track for 3.1 degrees, by the end of the century,
the writing is on the wall, climate catastrophe is coming.
And I know you know it
because there are billionaires now coming
to this country building bunkers to avoid it.
There's no silver bullet technology
that will suck all the carbon out of the atmosphere.
There is no policy that will reverse the deaths
that we've already seen
around the world due to climate change.
It is here, it is getting worse,
and New Zealand is a huge part of the problem with one
of the highest per capita greenhouse gas emissions
rates in the world.
So I'm sitting here trying
to figure out why this parliament is trying
to fast track this catastrophe even more.
Is it pure blindness?
Do you genuinely look around at the world
and think everything is fine?
Because let me tell you,
while you're sitting there ignoring reality,
the young people of this country are growing up traumatized
by all of the climate change related pain
and destruction they've already seen.
Or maybe it's hubris.
Maybe you think that climate change is bad for other people,
but it's not going to affect you.
But to quote a viral tweet, climate change will manifest
as a series of disasters viewed through phones with footage
that gets closer and closer to where you live
until you are the one filming it end quote, none of us are
so special that will be exempt from the
consequences of climate change.
When all the world's fresh water is poisoned with arsenic,
forever, chemicals and microplastics.
You are going to be poisoned along with the rest of us.
Or maybe you want the destruction, maybe you want
to be the party governing over the wasteland
that was once a beautiful country.
I can't for the life of me figure out why you would.
But considering the rate
that this coalition government is rocketing towards
that future, it sure seems that way.
So when you go home tonight, really look at your family,
look at your children and your
grandchildren if you have them.
Think about the future that they deserve to live in,
where they can drink water without being poisoned,
where they can live on their ancestral fen oil without it
being swallowed by the coastline
where they can read the news without being confronted
with mass death and chaos.
And ask yourself if it's worth destroying that future so
that some mining and development companies can
make a buck today.
Is that the legacy you want to leave?
I might sound angry, and it's because I am.
We're talking today about a wildly unpopular climate
threatening amendment to a law
that was passed under urgency, despite 83%
of submissions being against it from a moral democratic
and human survival perspective.
It is your responsibility to kill this bill,
and if you don't, we will resist it.
Kiara
Kda Lo and thank you for
that very passionate submission this afternoon.
Uh, look, we have met time, um,
but we appreciate your time, so thank you very much.
And, and no, not all of Parliament likes this bill.
Thank you. Uh, so we will now move on
to our next submitter, uh, Richard Ate,
who is waiting to come through.
Thank you for the opportunity to, uh, speak to you. Oh,
Hi Richard. We can't,
oh, there we go. We can see you now.
Welcome to the select committee.
You have five minutes with us. We'll hand it over to you.
Okay, thank you very much.
Um, uh, as
with the previous submitter, uh, I'm no fan
of the original legislation, uh,
and which has underpinning it, the idea that
economic growth needs to be, uh, speeded up, um,
that environmental protections need to be minimized, uh,
and that the community input can be discounted,
disregarded, or made less.
Um, unfortunately the proposed amendments, um,
actually continue down this track
and make the original legislation worse.
I'm not going to go into the detail of those clauses that,
uh, I think are the most egregious from this point of view,
um, that they're, they're in my written submission.
Um, I would say that both, obviously the original act
to be revoked and this amendment bill should be revoked.
Um, you can tinker with it as much as you like,
but it's actually taking the country down in the wrong
direction because there are actually
sufficient precedents in terms
of the Resource Management Act, um, at the moment
to get things, uh, fast track through.
Uh, they haven't under COVID.
Um, and if the NBES hadn't been thrown out,
there were actually fast track provisions in that as well.
So I'm gonna wind this and,
and some of the projects I won't, uh,
I'll say have some have considerable merit things to do
with infrastructure development for housing, um,
even roading in some particular cases.
But then you've got all kinds of extraordinary, um,
proposals like, um, waste burning
or, um, coal mining that have very little, um,
environmental merit.
Um, but those actual factors won't
be able to take into account.
Now, if you actually look back in history,
you'll actually find that prior to World War ii, um,
the environment is treated very much
as a second thought when you actually wanted to, um,
develop the country.
And after the second World War,
you had the Down Country Planning Act and the Water
and Soil Protection Act, um, which tried
to balance the environment and the economy.
Now, that wasn't adequate, so
therefore the Resource Management Act was brought in,
which actually then said
that the development should be underpinned by
by the environment.
The environment should be the, the guiding framework
for economic development.
Quite extraordinary,
this legislation actually takes us back
about a hundred years.
We're in the middle of a climate and biodiversity crisis,
and we have legislation here that is saying
that the actual environment can be completely discounted in
terms of its value compared with economic growth.
Now, we've seen this actually happen before.
We've had the National Development Act in 1979
and the Clyde Powering Act of 1982.
And what they actually achieved, well,
they actually built the dam, but they seen an
incredibly bad precedent.
They got revoked, um, when there was a change in government
and they actually didn't help that
particular national government survive.
And I've actually grew up in Canterbury, um, where
and the last 35 years I've been there,
and we've seen what fast tracking does there.
When the, um, national government, um,
removed the regional council
because it actually wanted
to consider environmental factors, decided
that economic growth was the most important thing,
push daring through.
And now we have ribs you can't swim in
and aquifers you can't take drinking water out of,
that's the result of this type of fast tracking men.
So, um, I would ask that the members
of the select committee consider their role,
your on Environment select committee was you wanna help
protect the environment.
Well, I think you should all think care very carefully which
side of history you want
to be in when you're considering this piece of legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Richard for, uh, your submission
and your passion today and your contribution.
Uh, look, we have met time, so uh, we will move on
to our next submitter, but we thank you very much.
Thank you for the time. So we now, uh,
welcome through te
welcome.
We can see you there, uh,
to the select committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we'll hand over to you
to talk us through your submission
and we just can't quite hear you yet.
Might just need to pop on the audio.
Uh, we, you still appear to be, uh, muted.
We can't hear you yet.
Amy and Robert. There we go. There we go. We can hear you.
You,
No, sorry, Madam Chair, that's Jayden.
Oh, that's Jayden. Okay. No, um,
Amy and Robert, if you can hear me, um,
perhaps if you join through your laptop,
you could run the sound through that
while you join.
We could skip ahead, Madam Chair to Nati Trust.
Okay. Yep. No, that's great.
Just while we sort out the, the technology.
So if they, if they're there
and available, if you pop them through,
that would be, that would be fantastic.
Welcome to the Select Committee.
Uh, thank you for joining us a little earlier.
Uh, you have 10 minutes, so we'll hand over to you.
Oh, Kira, um, Madam Chair, um, Graham Young, Nati Rui
and Nati Rui welcomes the opportunity this afternoon
to present our, our submission on the Fast Track Amendment
bill we submitted on the Fast Track approval bill back in
2024, so it's barely a year.
And, and in that submission we explained
how the bill was inconsistent
with both New Zealand's international obligations,
the principles of Torii fishery settlement
and our aquaculture settlement.
These objections were fundamental
and constitutional in nature.
Nati nui opposed the bill proceeding at all,
or if it was to proceed
to remove the economic exclusive zone EZ from its scope.
Nati Ru's objections
to the bill were completely compounded when the Trans Tasman
Resources Taranaki TTR Iron Sand Mining Project was added
to the list of the proj of for the projects
to the bill in a late stage
through its progress in Parliament,
Nati Rui has been engaged in this application, um,
for appro since approximately 2012.
Nati Uni is currently engaged with the TTR application
through the processes of the Fast Track Approvals Act.
Our comments today are informed by this engagement.
So you have have our submission in front
of you, um, the committee does.
So we will pick out key points
that we will highlight to you.
Look, it's proposed in clause five
that the minister could issue a government policy statement,
which would state the government's policies about regional
or national benefits of certain types of infrastructure
or development projects.
Clause 44 would then require an expert panel cons
to consider the relevant government policy statements.
This bill does not provide any guidance, any criteria,
any constraints on what can be included
in a government policy statement.
The statement could be very broad
or it could be highly specific perhaps
with specific projects in mind.
We hope this is not the case.
The minister is therefore given a very broad power
to influence the decision maker of expert panels
by dictating what qualifies as significant national
or regional benefits.
This is constitutionally inappropriate.
The bill does not require any consultation on a proposed
government policy statement.
Unlike other policy statements such
as under the Resource Management Act,
iwi would have no right and in particular Nati RU
and I would have no right
to provide feedback on the proposed government policy
statements that would affect processes that we are involved
with and our kaki responsibilities.
This is inconsistent with the principles to
particularly partnership and Tonga.
This is clause 33
of the bill would then restrict the panel's ability
to invite comments from persons
or groups who do not already have the right
to provide comments on the bill.
Such comments could only be invited if comments from the
relevant local authorities
or administering agencies will not
sufficiently address the matter.
This is completely impractical.
Local authorities and administering agencies may not be in a
position to say what matters.
Their comments will cover, there is extreme danger
and we underline that extreme danger that the panel will
therefore not be able
to make an informed decision on whether local authorities
and administering agencies will sufficiently
cover matters required.
Additionally, the panel will only have 10 working days from
its appointment to invite these comments.
It is not a realistic timeframe for which to check
with local authorities.
They barely will answer you in that timeframe.
Restricting the ability to invite comments will also place a
greater burden on parties with statutory rights such as iwi
with fewer groups to share the load.
Iwi will have to cover more detail
and likely incur more expense of engaging a range
of expert advisors.
The restriction could also exclude some
of our hapu organizations from receiving an invitation
to comment on both counts.
This is unfair and inconsistent with the principles of Toti
Clause 33.
Two would only allow expert panels
to invite comments on particular matters rather than
generally this is inappropriate 'cause.
Some invited groups or persons may have relevant information
or comments on the application.
Generally rather than just a particular matter.
Public participation should not be treated
as an inconvenience that slows down processes
and there should, should not be limited as far as possible,
which this act bill is trying to do.
Public participation contributes to the quality
of decision making by increasing the range of information
and per perspectives that decision maker can consider.
Clause 50 of the bill would prevent parties who are invited
to provide comment from appealing the panel's decision.
Only parties who have statutory rights
to provide comments would be able to bring appeals.
This would place a greater burden on parties
again, such as iwi.
Furthermore, the restriction on appeals is pointless.
Any alleged error of law
that can be raised on appeal on a point
of law can also be raised on an application
for judicial review.
Parties who are invited to comment are
therefore likely just file a judicial review app,
an judicial review application instead of an appeal.
So effectively you're gonna be worse off, I suspect.
Further we note downgrading engagement with iwi
and hapu prior to it actually being lodged as an application
is in also inconsistent with treaty principles.
So just notifying us is totally inappropriate.
Genuine engagement must involve consultation,
not just notification.
This is the essence of treaty partnership
and good faith Nati run's experience
with the FastTrack process is that timeframes are already
extremely tight and, um,
will impose major burdens on part on parties.
Participating in the process reducing
or limiting timeframes further is
unrealistic and unworkable.
The taranaki TTR project applications illustrates
how 60 working days limit for the panel
to issue a decision is unrealistic.
Even the applicant in this case, the one most strident
for Fast Track asked for a hundred working days.
So it just doesn't make sense
that you're now gonna reduce it to 60 through this bill,
the panel convener and ultimately decided on 130 days.
In this case, the panel could not realistically complete its
consideration of the application
and issue a decision in 1660 working days.
It is likewise unrealistic to expect the panel
to convener will always be able
to set up a panel within 15 working days.
Finding panel members with suitable expertise takes time
and requiring approaching considerable number of people.
Um, you need to find members who are available
and do not have conflicts of interest
that will take longer than 15 working days.
And the final point that we would like to stress
to the committee is the bill contains no
transitional provisions.
This leaves it unclear how it applies to applications
that are already being considered.
The lack of transitional provisions must be remedied in
order to provide procedural chaos
and uncertainty for applications
that are already under consideration.
Transitional provisions provide that the bill does not apply
to substantive applications that will file
before it received royal ascend.
This in its simplest form, is the most orderly
and fairest approach.
If provisions of the bill relating to the panel's, processes
and consideration of the application are applied
to applications where the panel has already been set up.
This will cause confusion
and procedural unfairness as well as making the job
of a panel even more onerous.
A panel's, deadlines, processes
and mandatory consideration could suddenly change in the
middle of its consideration.
This could make it impractical for the panel
to complete its consideration of the application
and decision and deliver the decision within
a required timeframe.
We urgently, strongly you, if there's one point
that you take from our submission that you strongly,
we strongly recommend transitional provisions are inserted.
Nati Uni. Thanks the committee
for listening to us this afternoon.
Thank you very much for that submission.
Look, we've got time for just one question from Debbie
Kda. Thank you, um, for the
chair.
Uh, um, is it Nati Uni's view
that the GPS mechanism risks allowing ministers
to declare seabed mining a national benefit?
Uh, through you Madam Chair, this is
of a significant risk.
We believe a a, uh,
government policy statement could be specifically tailored
to a project which would completely undermine the
independence of a panel making a decision.
And we believe that potentially it is designed to forward
and to, uh, undercut the democratic process
of an expert panel to deliver a sound
and robust decision if effectively, um, directed
by Minister from Behind.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission today
for those insights and analysis. Appreciate your time.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um, so now we will pop back to, uh, the previous submitter,
uh, who was having some technical issues earlier.
Uh, RA uh, hopefully
we can see you now and, uh, hopefully we can hear you.
Welcome back. There we go.
We have sound. Uh, you have 10 minutes.
We will hand it over to you.
Thank you.
And I'm here with Robert McClain
and KO Stewart, who I'll allow to introduce themselves.
Uh, Robert McLean, advisor for,
Uh, here, uh,
senior Environmental Policy Advisor for,
Um, we are speaking on behalf of
the mandated Iwi Authority
and we thank you for the opportunity to speak today
and take our submission as read.
Our position is clear,
strongly opposes the fast Track approvals amendment
built in its entirety.
Before speaking to the detail of our concerns, I want
to acknowledge the stand our iwi has already taken.
On the 8th of May, 2024, Nati toga.
Together with our Art Confederation Fanga
demonstrated our opposition
to the original Fast Track approvals bill.
Through an act of ti, hundreds
of our people marched from the Wellington Railway station
to Parliament to defend our t
and to uphold our responsibilities as kaki
ti means to draw a line, a line that says, enough, a line
that says the Crown cannot continue to sideline
UA strip environmental protections
and disregard treaty commitments.
The amendments in this bill cross that line.
Once again, the bill severely restricts iwi
and community participation in decisions
that directly affect our ua, our harbor,
our y and our Tonga.
Clause 44 requires decision making panels
to determine applications within 60 working days.
This is an impossibly short timeframe
for cultural impact assessments, environmental modeling,
or proper scrutiny processes
that rush analysis inevitably result in poor decisions for
the participation is not procedural.
It is part of our obligation as kaki.
When timeframes make genuine engagement impossible,
the integrity of the entire process collapses.
This bill does not enable participation.
It deliberately restricts it.
Several clauses expand ministerial authority in ways
that fundamentally undermine the neutrality
and integrity of environmental decision making.
For example, clause 54, which allows ministers
to alter project descriptions and schedule two by audit
and council, meaning project scope can change without
environmental reassessment or engagement.
These provisions shift decision making from independent
evidence-based processes into political hands.
For mana, this is unsafe and unacceptable.
One of the most significant issues is
that the fast track pathway strips away treaty obligations
embedded across our environmental and conservation laws.
Under the RMA Conservation Act, fisheries Act
and others, there are clear statutory duties
to consider or give effect to.
The Fast Track system removes these duties entirely.
F this directly contradicts the commitments made in our
claims settlement Act 2014, which affirmed our relationship
with environmental decision making across alro.
Here, removing treaty obligations is more
than a technical emission.
It is a breach of the Crown Iwi partnership
and a regression in the hard one.
Progress of the last decade.
Nazi tour's concerns are grounded in
generations of experience.
We still live with the legacy
of past crown decisions made without proper safeguards.
The reclamation of the AOR uas, the drainage of wetlands,
the protection and infrastructure projects undertaken
without ecological consideration, pollution
and degradation that have affected kawana cultural practices
and the wellbeing of our people.
These harms were the direct result of processes
that sidelined iwi rushed assessment
and put development ahead of environmental integrity.
The Fast Check approvals amendment Bill recreates those same
conditions, but at a larger and faster pace.
Our submission makes it clear
this Bill exposes our environment, our communities,
and our Tonga to unacceptable and irreversible risk.
In our written submission, LATI
RA made our position explicit.
We do not support the bill,
we do not support the amendments,
and we do not believe this framework can be made safe.
Through further amendment, we oppose the erosion
of participation, the removal of treaty protections,
the concentration of power in ministerial hands,
the bypassing of environmental assessment, the weakening
of checks and balances,
and the risk it poses to Al and Al.
Our concern is not about detail,
it is about the fundamental architecture of the bill.
It is flawed in principle, flawed in process
and inconsistent with the Crown's obligations
under TER or wa.
And our settlement, this bill should not proceed nati
to, has already drawn an ti a line signaling
that this approach to environmental decision making is not
acceptable Nati to acknowledges the value
of a consenting pathway where it improves efficiency.
Our opposition is not to improvement
of the consenting process itself,
but to a model that sidelines ua, we can safeguards
and undermines the treaty commitments
that guide our role as kaki.
The bill represents a clear step backwards
for Environmental Protection Treaty Partnership
and Democratic for the wellbeing
of T or the rights of ua.
And for the future of our communities,
we strongly urge the committee to reject this bill.
Thank you. Uh, we've got our first question from Debbie,
Uh, through the chair.
Uh,
a couple of questions.
Uh, your submission highlighted,
and you spoke to it the past Crown, um,
environmental damage such as the, um, harbor,
uh, reclamations.
And I'd like to, um, ascertain from you, do you see,
and you did say you see this bill similar,
but do you see this bill repeating those patterns?
And if so, what has that meant to,
and I've just got one supplementary to that, if that's okay.
Yes. I
think the pattern is direct ministerial involvement
in decision making in, in the environment,
and that's where the real damage occurred to.
So I think that was the key kind
of pri principle of violation.
And I guess the, um, follow up on that is
how would the decision made under this bill in the
waterways, the marine environment, including Seabed Mining,
which I saw that you mentioned, um,
how would Fast Track powers, um, weaken your ability
to uphold the co-governance, uh, relationships
that you've negotiated through your settlement?
And then how do they weaken your ability to oppose, uh,
such projects and proposals?
Yeah, so I,
I think the whole thing about the settlement was in,
in agreement to do things together and,
and to work as partners together.
Not, not just central government coming along and,
and just doing what it wants.
I mean, we may be supportive of some fast back projects such
as the renewal of the sea walls at Wellington Airport or,
or what have you, but it's just how it's done
and how those relationships are developed as partners.
Um, yeah, I don't,
I think just to add to that as well would just be
around the fact of removing, uh, consultation,
really meaningful consultation with the iwi
so we can have experts so we can have, we're able to share
our voice, um, our MAGA
and everything that we stand for as well within a project.
Uh, so that can already have those safeguards rather than
just being notified that a project is gonna be done.
I think that's a, a really big, big part of that change. But
Hey, thank you very much for your submission today.
Uh, it's a really thorough, um, weighty submission,
so we thank you for the time that you've put into that
for us to consider.
So, um, appreciate your time
and we got there on the end on the technical side
of things, so thank you.
Um, look, members, we are going to break now until three 20,
so we'll take a short break and resume then
Done, done
Kda. If Cameron Hodgson
is on the call,
could you please use the raise hand function?
Well welcome back everyone
to the Fast Track approvals Amendment Bill,
final hearings for the day.
Uh, we will welcome through our next Submitter
Ridge Burn Limited.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon,
Alex. Uh, Tina
Koto. Good afternoon.
Um, yeah, my name's Alex Devine.
I'm a resource management lawyer from Alice Gold
and I'm, um, here today on behalf of Ridge Burn Limited.
Um, I was hoping to have with me Mr. Cameron Hodgson, um,
who is the general manager of Ridge Burn Limited
and it's related entity Gibbs Co.
It looks like he is still struggling
to have issues accessing the call, so you might have
to make do with, um, just me
and hopefully if he's able to log on, he can jump in.
We, we can just see him there. He's just popped up, so,
Okay. Excellent. Cameron, welcome.
Hello, how you doing?
We hand it over to you. You've got 10 minutes with us.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, so first of all,
thank you very much for fitting us in.
Um, we were having some Tech Nicole difficulties yesterday
morning, so, um, we appreciate being given the opportunity,
uh, to present again this afternoon.
Um, I understand that you have had an opportunity
to read our submission, um, which is really helpful.
So in terms of how I'm gonna structure the presentation
today, proposing to just, um, reorientate
or sort of set the scene, um, give a bit of background
to Ridge Burn and then I'll jump into, um, the change
that Ridge Burn is seeking.
Uh, I'll then, uh, pass over to Mr.
Hodgson to see if he has anything that he would like to add.
Uh, and then happy to take any questions from the committee.
Um, so in terms of, uh, Ridge Burn,
this is set out in our submission,
but they are a related entity, sorry, of Gibbins Co.
Who are a privately, uh, owned property development company,
um, delivering or specializing in high quality, uh,
residential and commercial developments across the country.
Um, and Ridge Burn currently has a proposal in Queenstown,
which is, um, in the fast track process.
So it was referred sort of a month
or a couple of months ago.
Um, and a substantive application will be being,
uh, lodged in due course.
Now Richmond's submission, uh, to this, um,
on this bill focuses on one additional change
that it would like to see to the Fast Track Act.
Uh, and that change is the ability to alter, uh,
or remove consent notice conditions.
Um, and There are two key reasons why we say, uh,
you should make this change.
I also talk to a number of, uh, sort of subsidiary matters,
uh, which we say support, uh, this change being made, um,
as part of the suite of sort of technical
and operational, uh, changes to the Fast Track Act.
So the first reason, um, is
that the RMA already provides a process to alter
or remove consent notice conditions.
So what is missing here is the explicit, um,
and I say explicit 'cause I have, uh, dealt
with this in the Russian submissions.
But essentially there appears to be, um, a level
of confusion about whether or not it is
or, um, not in fact provided for.
But what's missing is the explicit ability to use, uh,
that RMA process, um, under this Fast Track Act.
And that sort of leads onto my second key point, which is
that inability to use that existing RMA process,
we say undermines the Fast Track ACT's ability
to truly operate as a one stop shop.
Instead, what we have, uh, is a need to push out
to a later stage, something that is very relevant, um,
in many cases to being able to execute the consent
that you get or the approval
that you get from the Fast Track process.
Uh, in terms of a couple of the subsidiary matters, um,
that we would say supports the change, um, it's not novel,
it's not new, uh, pro it's a process.
It's already available. Um, and in essentially all
but one respect, uh, it would operate
as it does under the Resource Management Act.
Um, we are simply seeking that it be able to be wrapped up
as part of the Fast Track Act approvals.
And the Fast Track Act already enables, um, you to amend
or remove certain types of consent conditions.
And from Ridge Burn's perspective, uh,
we don't consider there is any material reason
to treat consent notice conditions differently.
Um, and then
guess the last point I make is consent.
Notice conditions cover a range of matters.
You know, they can, uh, the one end, you have ones
that restrict further subdivision or building platforms,
but they also address very mundane things, um, such
as we are lighting or accesses to be located.
Uh, and there's often very practical reasons
to need to update them.
Things such as they might require a particular stormwater
or wastewater solution, uh, which sort of needs resizing
or, um, recalibrating to reflect the different level
of servicing requirements where you have a much bigger
or a different type of development.
Um, so that was a very quick run through, um,
the reasons we say supporting that change
to enable consent notice, um, conditions to be
amended through the Fast Track Act.
I will, uh, pass over to Mr.
Hodgson to see if he's got anything further to add.
Otherwise, happy to take any questions.
Um, yeah, thank you Alex.
Um, just one observation, um, I'd like to share.
Um, given Sky, we are delivering a number
of large integrated developments across New Zealand.
Um, and in our experience, um, it's pretty normal process
for consent notices to require amendment
or full removal under a, giving an effect to a consent.
Um, often those consent notices sort of of fall outside
of a particular context
and in the new context of an integrated development, um,
it's appropriate, um, to have them changed.
Um, as Alex sort of touched on
before, there can be some sort of mundane items relating
to a rural pasture of land, you know, governing what type
of fencing should be used, which is not appropriate to a,
an integrated, uh, residential subdivision,
um, in its new form.
Uh, other other examples are relocating services
or access ways to align with new routing networks,
which are just practical changes which need to occur.
Thank you. That's all I have to share.
Thank you very much.
Um, look, I'll just jump in with a quick question
around the, um, you talked about
that you have got a proposal in Queenstown, um, that's going
through Fast Track at the moment.
Uh, how have you found that experience
through the current process?
Uh, yeah, look, we've found the process really great.
We're really supportive of the, um, uh, of the FDAA.
Um, yeah, we have been working closely
with the authorities
and the Iwi groups, um, on the consultation side of things,
which there have been some challenges in terms
of getting everyone aligned to respond quickly, um,
which is, uh, pretty normal
and, uh, yeah, it requires a, a lot of administration.
But, um, yeah, we, yeah, we're pretty happy
with the way things are progressing at the moment.
Um, we're about to lodge our substantive
before Christmas, so there's a lot
of work going in at the moment to try
and pull the various strings together
Because we did hear from Queenstown
and obviously, you know, the need for housing down there,
being a very expensive area in the country,
and, um, you know, wanting to see consenting moving faster
so we can get more houses online.
I mean, do you feel that, um,
the cons from a property developer's point of view
that the consenting process is moving, you know, fast enough
to, uh, you know, build the houses we need?
Um, yeah, we have a, a really good relationship
with QLDC down in Queenstown.
Um, and we, we do have a number
of other developments which we're developing
under existing zoned land.
Um, yeah, it's the typical issues with, um, growth, um,
infrastructure problems, which need to be solved.
And yeah, we're having to get in into funding arrangements
with the, um, authorities to sort of bring things forward,
which, uh, yeah, requires, as I mentioned
before, a lot of working together
with the authorities to make it work.
But yeah, we've found the QAC teams very pragmatic and,
and really encouraging to, uh, allow us
to develop properties down there, which is great.
Thank you. Uh, Rachel Brooking has a question.
Yeah, just related to that, Cameron,
when you're saying the usual problems, do you mean the, um,
working out how to pay for needed new infrastructure?
Yes. Yeah.
Brilliant. Hey, well, thank you very much both
for your submission, uh,
and yeah, finding the time to,
to slot you in given the technical difficulties yesterday,
but, uh, and we really appreciate
your submission, so thank you.
Thank you very much. No problem. Thank you.
So we will now welcome through our next submitter,
which is Kiwi Rail.
Welcome to this select committee.
We can see you there,
hopefully hear you if you pop on your audio.
Welcome.
Hi there. Um, Maria bat, uh,
senior Corporate Council from Kiwi Rail.
I'm here with Dave Gordon, who's just joined, so, oh, yes,
he'll be leading on the submission.
Oh, brilliant. Yes, we can see Dave's
just coming on board now.
Welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand over for you
to talk us through your submission. Thank you.
Okay, thank you, chair. Uh, to recap,
our submission was short
and we really focused on three items that we supported
being the ability to support the minister to list staging
of, to have staging of a listed project, clarity
around the timelines
and a pathway to amend the short descriptions
taking each of those.
In turn, uh, of the projects we have listed, uh,
in she 2, 2, 2 of the four
are more likely to be done in stages than in, in one.
And at the moment, that's the file four tracking West Filter
KO and Lower North Island integrated mobility.
At, at present, uh, the, the, the app doesn't provide
for the minister to, uh, stage the,
to have staging on these projects when in fact, uh,
I think a lot of the infrastructure projects that on
that list will have have, uh, staging.
So, so very much supporting that change.
The second item is clarity around process timelines,
where in the infrastructure business, anything
that can give, uh, clarity around the timelines is, uh,
important to us.
The third area of support is the ability
to amend the very short descriptions
of projects in the schedules,
because these are summaries of referral applications,
and we didn't actually provide feedback on those originally.
And we have in our submission, uh,
suggested minor amendments to those, which, uh,
we'd like to see carried through.
For example, one is just geographical errors.
The other, uh, small items, they don't go to the substance
of the, of the proposal at all.
But, uh, they are important clarifications by way of that.
And we've also sought to, uh, refer in terms of the,
the changes to say, uh,
particularly a project in section two in relation
to listed project as described in Schedule two
and as further described in the referral application, just
to give clarity around to around that.
Uh, those are the, uh, four points
that we wanted covered off.
Uh, I'll just ask Maria if she has anything else
that she wishes to add?
No, you, you've got it all. It's very straightforward.
Thank, we're happy to answer any questions.
Brilliant. Thank you very much, uh,
to you both for that submission.
Uh, we will start with Rachel Brooking,
who has a question. Thank
You. Two short
questions. Um,
I just wanna pick up on something you said then, David,
about how you applied to be on the schedule,
but then somebody else summarized it,
and so there was no feedback.
Uh, if you can just confirm that that was the process,
because of course we, uh, parliamentarians didn't see any
of this until it was made in as a amendment
to the bill at the committee stage.
Maria, can you speak to that one?
'cause you're Yes, you're closer to the process than I'm
Okay, no problem. Yes,
we provided the, um, detailed applications
and then we didn't see the summary
that was included in the schedule.
So when the draft bill was circulated,
schedule two wasn't included, so
that wasn't included till the final stage.
So we didn't get a chance to review that summary
to make sure it was, you know, factually correct.
And we are just conscious that someone looking at it,
a glance should get a true reflection of
what the project relates to.
So those are, that's are minor amendments on that basis.
Yeah, no, thank you for explaining that.
Um, issue to do with speed and transparency.
Uh, second issue is just to confirm
that Kiwi Rail's got no interest in supermarkets
or supermarket competition.
None whatsoever. Not at all. No. Thank you.
Yeah. Well,
thank you very much.
Uh, it appears that we have, uh, no further
questions from the committee.
We, uh, appreciate your submission,
but obviously take it as, uh, well read, um, and understood.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, You chair and committee members. Thank you.
So we will now move on to our next submitter,
the Auckland Council.
Welcome Dean. Uh, James, we can see you both there.
Great. Welcome to the Select committee this afternoon.
You have 10 minutes with us, so we will hand it over to you
to talk us through your, uh, very weighty
and thorough submission.
So, uh, we thank you for that.
That's fine. That's gonna be my first question is how,
how did you have time to write such a long
submission? Thank you.
Um, um, we have, oh, sorry, we're vibrating here.
Just bear with me a moment.
Oh, you're getting a bit of feedback there, James.
We can hear it.
That might help. Can you still hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. That's better.
Um, okay. So the first question was,
how do we manage to pull this together?
Uh, clearly Auckland Council's a big space with, um,
many people interested, um, in this particular,
um, uh, area.
Uh, so yeah, we, we worked together to, uh,
to make sure we addressed all the points that, uh,
that we felt were necessary.
Um, to start off with, um, I need to point out that the,
our submission was a technical submission,
um, prepared by staff.
We haven't actually run it past the elected members.
There wasn't sufficient time to set up a, um, a meeting, uh,
with elected members.
Um, however, um,
Auckland Council has consistently supported, um,
streamlining RMA approvals for infrastructure projects, um,
in particular, um, especially where they have significant
regional and national benefits.
Um, and the council has experience considerable experience
in fast track projects under the act
and under the COVID-19 fast track legislation.
So my role at council is the head of resource consents,
and, um, my colleague, Dean Williams sitting next
to me runs the team that looks
after all of the, the fast track, uh, consenting.
So they've, um, uh, pulled together quite a lot of, uh,
experience in working under the legislation
as it stands at the moment.
Um, in, in our view, the bill, um, introduces,
introduces significant change to further streamlining
and, uh, the consenting process, which does need
to be carefully considered.
Um, this bill will create new problems, um,
and will not, in our view, achieve what is what is intended.
The council looks forward to working
with the government on the forthcoming RMA reform in which
systemic problems can be thoroughly addressed.
Um, it's our view that the bill will not deliver fast
and reliable approvals or certainty for approval holders.
Um, local author's role has been further reduced
by replacing the requirement for applicants
to consult councils prior to lodging an application
with limited, limited notification
and reducing the timeframe
for comments on a referral application from 20
to 15 working days.
Um, so, uh, it, uh, ultimately,
Auckland Council opposes the fast track approvals
bill in its current form.
Um, I want to acknowledge the other, um,
submitters who've already spoken on many
of the same issue issues,
which no doubt about will traverse.
Um, and although we do oppose the bill,
our focus today is on looking, uh, looking at solutions
to improve, uh, workability.
Um, the, the, the key, uh, topics that I want to,
to talk about, um, are, uh, one local voice
and natural justice two system efficiencies, uh,
and infrastructure, just those three broad areas
in terms of local voice and natural justice.
Um, we believe that, uh, deleting clauses relating
to a government policy statement, which increases, uh,
ministerial discretion to determine projects eligibility
and to influence the outcome of panel decisions,
including the ability to issue future GPSs, uh, on a
regional or, or national benefits of certain types
of projects, uh, should be done.
If GPSs, uh, retained, um, uh,
then councils should, uh, be enabled
to comment on those draft GPSs
and clarify that a GPS does not predetermine
the panel's decision.
Um, retaining the requirement for local authorities
to be consulted on referral applications,
we believe will improve outcomes, uh,
and remove restrictions that comments are re relevant
to the application.
Um, sorry, we should remove restrictions
that comments are relevant to the application.
Um, in terms of retaining existing provisions
for parties invited to comment to have 20 working days, um,
we believe that, um, uh, provisions should be made
for extensions where additional information is required.
This will enable councils to provide meaningful
and helpful input to expert panels
and improve the quality of, uh, decision making,
retaining the panel's broad discretion
to invite additional persons to comment
and to have appeal rights for all persons invited
to comment on applications, we believe is something that,
um, that should be included, um, in the bill
focusing on, uh, the second point, system efficiency, um,
retaining existing provisions that enable the panel to, uh,
convener to set an appropriate timeframe, uh,
we believe is necessary.
Um, especially having regard to the scale, nature
and complexity of the approvals.
Um, we believe that we should delete the, um,
60 day upper limit
or alternatively provide, um, an upper limit
or at least a hundred working days.
Um, introducing an express right for councils
to comment on any modified approval
if it materially expands the scope of a proposal we believe,
um, is necessary.
Um, one thing which isn't included
but should be is including transitional provisions
clarifying how new powers
and altered obligations will apply to referral
and substantive applications already underway at the time
of commencement.
Uh, in terms of the third point infrastructure, um,
the ACT already provides, um, adequate powers for panels
to impose infrastructure related, um, conditions,
but these are always subject
to established legal constraints.
Um, applicants need clear conditions on which they can rely,
and local authorities need effective conditions, uh,
that can be enforced, uh, enabling a panel to impose, uh,
a condition or conditions to ensure
that infrastructure will be adequate to support the project,
um, uh, is unlawful.
If it requires a local authority
or a CCO to provide infrastructure, um,
conditions can only apply to, uh, applicants.
So, uh, this, I guess, is perhaps one of the core areas
of concern that we have as, um, council, uh,
the potential ability for the panels to impose, uh,
infrastructure building maintenance, uh,
requirements on council when it's outta sequence, uh,
from our planned infrastructure development.
Um, we also believe that preventing consent conditions
that seek to bind third parties and avoid vesting, uh,
and, uh, yes, sorry.
Uh, we believe that preventing consent conditions that seek
to bind, um, third parties, um,
and avoiding vesting
of inferior infrastructure should also be
included, um, in the act.
If these are retained, um, then we need clear amendments,
uh, to ensure that conditions, um,
only impose obligations on the consent holders, um,
as opposed to third parties.
Um, we also need to make it clear
that no condition may require
or presume acts action by a council CCO,
or infrastructure provider without the written agreement.
Um, and it also needs to be made clear, uh,
that the funding, timing
and delivery delivery of public infrastructure
remain matters for councils
and their CCOs to determine, um,
ensuring projects are located
where infrastructure capacity exists,
or applicants pay for necessary infrastructure in accordance
with the principle that growth pays for growth, um,
is also an important aspect.
We believe in terms of the things that we support, um,
we do support improvements to consenting processes, um,
including, um, provision enabling listed projects to proceed
as staged substantive applications, uh,
provided decision making or a later stage as prevented.
Uh, if an earlier stage on which the latest stage relies has
not had all decision making completed
and is beyond challenge.
Um, again, uh, we support the idea that the secretary
for the environment and the Environmental Protection
Authority can seek further information from an applicant
instead of returning the application as incomplete.
We support a new requirement, uh, for the panel covea
to consult with local authorities prior
to setting the timeframe to issue decision documents, um,
and we would also support improved cost recovery
for local authorities.
Um, although some improvement is necessary so
that applicants are not subsidized
by rate payers setting up a limits, we believe
through new regulations might not be, uh, proportionate
to the scale of development.
And certainly in Auckland Council,
we've experienced very large applications
and, uh, ones of more moderate modest scale.
Um, in conclusion,
Auckland Council has always supported fast tracking RMA
approvals for significant infrastructure, uh, projects
because of their importance to society and economy.
However, council does oppose, uh,
this bill in its current form.
Um, we believe the bill is unsupported by evidence
and concentrates too much power in the hands of ministers.
That's the end of my third presentation.
Thank you very much, James. Uh, we appreciate your
Down has just disappeared.
Oh, There we go.
That's the, the end of your, your submission. Okay.
Uh, look, we've got a few questions there, so, uh,
we'll go first to Grant McCallum and then Rachel Brooking.
Yeah, hi. Um, thanks for that.
Um, just around the infrastructure piece, right?
Um, let me get rid of that, uh,
around the infrastructure piece, it, um,
we've had submissions from, from people, you know,
applicants who say they're concerned that, um,
if they get approval for a, uh, to, to build for a project,
whether the housing project
or whatever, the councils can then utilize the
infrastructure requirements to say, well, actually,
we don't really want this, so we won't bother delivering.
We, we won't deliver the infrastructure.
Any comment on that?
I, I think it's important to look at the overall process.
So the, the granting of the approval at the end, um,
isn't the be all and end all.
If applicants are working with councils, um, uh, in advance
of lodging their applications,
then they'll have a much better understanding, uh,
of the requirements and what may or may not be feasible.
Um, while co councils, of course, uh, uh,
locked into a certain funding, um, cycle, um, y you know,
there, there are, there's always possibility of,
of prioritizing or, um, having, as I said in my submissions,
uh, an applicant fund parts of the, uh, necessary, uh,
increased infrastructure.
And, and just quickly, there's a sub.
So if a, if a, um, applicant does, you know, say, look, we,
we can fund that infrastructure change
or whatever's required, would that make a, um,
make a difference from your perspective?
Uh, yes. It, it could do,
although, of course, um, infrastructure development takes,
uh, quite a bit of, uh, lead time to plan, um,
and, uh, develop.
So, uh, ensuring everything's, um, aligned in terms
of timing of the applicant's expectations
and council's ability to deliver, um,
is something that needs to be considered. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we'll go to Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Still on this, um, issue of infrastructure
and sequencing.
So particularly for new housing developments,
is it Auckland Council's position, uh, that your plans
have been made to think about capacity, uh,
for infrastructure and
therefore identify areas that are ready for more housing?
Um, and is that a way to get around the sequencing issue?
And then if you can just comment briefly on, uh,
something you said, uh, James, about the vesting
of inferior infrastructure.
So I presume that you mean a developer will say, oh, well,
we need a new roundabout, so we'll build it.
That's probably not a very good example,
but can you give us an example of
where you've seen inferior infrastructure
and what that has meant for the council
who then presumably has to maintain that infrastructure?
Y Yes. So, um, two questions.
The first one, um, is, uh, does our do our plans, uh, a,
a address the sequencing issue?
Um, yes, that's the, the very reason I think that we have,
um, the unitary plan, um, with our future urban zones, um,
and other zones so that, um, infrastructure can be, uh,
provided for and delivered in a, uh, timely fashion.
Um, as those different areas of, um, Auckland, um,
become available, uh,
and the, the reverse, we do see that, um, with, um,
uh, private plan changes where people try to, um,
push the development of a particular area outta sequence,
uh, that can cause issues, uh, for council, meaning that
that roads and pipes need to be, um, extended into areas
where they weren't intended, uh, to be provided for.
And of course, that has, um, uh, operational, uh, uh,
implications, operational cost, uh, implications.
Um, so yes, the unitary plan, um,
as we develop it is designed to, uh, to incorporate, um, uh,
a staged development approach.
Um, secondly, the vesting of inferior infrastructure.
Um, so perhaps the easiest one to understand is, um,
parks you might not consider a park and infrastructure,
but, um, for, for present purposes, I would call it, um,
piece of infrastructure, um, I, I have seen, uh,
the tendency for developers, um, to try to develop a,
a piece of parkland, which is basically unusable
or, um, will have high maintenance costs
because it's part of the inferior land that they can't
otherwise, um, build on.
So, um, at the end of the process, uh, an attempt
to vest such, um, assets and council, um, can be made.
Look, thank you very much.
We are going to have to end it there.
We have gone, uh, over time,
but, uh, really thorough, great submission, uh,
plenty in there
and obviously a lot going on in terms
of development in Auckland.
So, um, all very important stuff. So thank you very much.
And I consider parks infrastructure. Yeah,
As infrastructure. I think
Celia does as well. 'cause
we're both talking about.
Absolutely. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh,
now we will welcome our last submitter for today to
trust, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
We can see you there. Uh, you have 10 minutes with us,
so we'll hand it over to you.
Um, agree things to everybody.
Today I had planned on delivering this completely into
Maori, but I might just, um,
between the two languages, if you don't mind.
And I'm assuming that, uh, there'll be some way
for you guys to translate.
Um, some of the
approvals amendment bill
engagement is redefined as notification stripping it
of its substance ka the bill restricts
who made comments excluding Hapu MA
and communities who hold the lived knowledge of place ka.
It removes appeal rights when invited submitters turning
partnership into procedural formality
for iwi like ours whose
and carry longstanding industrial pressure.
These changes are dangerous, uh,
so far.
I would just like to touch on also some
of our experience in the current, um,
TTR Fast Track hearing process.
Uh, we thought it was important for us
to talk about something we're actually experiencing
and not just reading about.
Has spent nearly 15 years opposing the TTRC bed mining
proposal through various statutory processes.
The recent fast track hearing showed us clearly
what happens when timeframes are compressed,
and participation is narrowed from the panel records.
We have seen, uh, that it says
that key information has been missing, outdated,
or insufficient, including
instead of improved modeling ative effect.
At a recent conference, it was noted
that the applicant had not undertaken comprehensive baseline
studies and intended
to gather the essential data af after the approval.
Uh, it was also noted that con cultural evidence,
including rahi BA relationships
and settlement obligations, required significant explanation
because the timeframe and processes did not allow
for the proper understanding.
Other local authorities, uh, confirm lack of engagement,
unclear benefits,
and are reliance on unverified economic modeling.
The fast track process so far has forced us
as iwi into a defensive PO posture.
At times, we've had to respond at speed
with limited visibility
and with no guaranteed right of appeal.
Uh, for us, we don't see this as the proper way
for treaty partners to engage.
We also note that the bill undermines treaty settlements.
Our treaty settlements are not symbolic.
They are living in instruments that recognize our status
as ua.
They protect our specific TGA and sites.
They create durable mechanisms for partnership
and require the crown our partner
to act in a manner consistent with those obligations.
The amendment bill in its current form can be seen
to be doing the opposite in our view at NA's iwi involvement
at sideline settlement instruments.
And it creates a process
where ministers can approve projects without demonstrating
alignment with settlement protections in the hearing,
along with Naru repeatedly had
to produce settlement text crown apologies,
the cultural evidence simply to establish
what we all already know,
that the settlement rights are the flaw,
but not an optional consideration in regards
to thu.
And we cannot fast track these.
Kopa T Maori is deliberate.
The hapu and whanau based decision making requires time
to gather, to consider, to ang
and to reconcile competing views.
Rahi, for example, are not symbolic gestures.
They are critical responses to ecological risk, death
contamination, or danger.
As we have already explained to various panels
and committees, rahi apply to all activities, recreational,
commercial, and industrial.
Our communities, including our, our fanga, our
toga respect,
and uphold them within our,
we have en enacted for over 15
to 20 years in response to environmental effects.
This is a process, uh, that we are now looking at
that is going to compress decision windows to 10
to 20 days working days.
And it's incapable
of respecting these systems for us.
The environmental risk is too high here in Taranaki,
especially here in Taranaki.
Our marine environment is already under pressure
with industrial discharges, historical oil
and gas activity, warming seas, species decline,
unexplored, and newly discovered re reef systems.
And cumulative and sedimentation impacts documented
by the likes of Taranaki Regional Council and also niwa.
We see that the fast track processes
will minimize the ability,
and we've experienced this too, minimize the ability
to identify, understand,
and mitigate cumulative cumulative effects, especially
where scientific gaps remain.
As noted also by TRC,
information on environmental effects particularly, uh,
were particularly light, uh, when it came
to the impacts on reef ecosystems,
and they do remain a little bit piecemeal ish.
And in the PTR case experts demonstrated that the economic
benefits at this point are still uncertain.
The modeling relied on optimistic and unverified assumptions
and the environmental effects were likely underestimated.
If the fast track system is weakened,
further high risk projects will slip, could slip
through without proper scrutiny.
This bill creates a bit of a democratic democratic deficit.
It restrict who can submit or appeal it.
Amputates community voice, especially those closest
to the impact our coastal communities,
our environmental groups, our local authorities, as well
as us, our hapu, our Marai, our uri, and our iwi makeups.
These are the groups with the most skin in the game,
the deepest knowledge of the place we all live here.
We are the practitioners.
Uh, we think
that the public confidence demands transparency,
participation and the ability to test evidence
removing those protections benefit nobody including the REC
Report.
I apologize to interrupt.
Um, but we have gone well over time now,
so I'm just wondering if you'd like to just make a, a couple
of final remarks just to wrap up.
We, what we ask of the committee is that this is withdrawn
or substantially revised in its current form so
that it cannot override treaty settlement protections,
that it restores iwi, hapu
and communicate, uh, community partition part
participation rights, including the ability to appeal.
And it ensures that engagement is meaningful,
not merely notification.
Uh, also that it prote protects t Maori processes.
I can see that everybody is ready to jump off the screen.
This is what we are fighting,
we are being rushed through everything.
Um, so just want it to be noted that I, I'm not,
I understand that we we're being pushed for time
and that's our point as, uh, as representatives of
Ilda, thank you very much for your submission today.
Appreciate your time.
Uh, that brings us to the end of our public hearing, uh,
and our public, uh, submissions.
So members, we will now move into private session, uh, for,
uh, some time with officials.
Yeah, just before you go, um, where is that link?
'cause yesterday we got booted and I couldn't find it.
Uh, yes, we should be,
it should have been sent, emailed link.
Jayden, can you just let us know where that link is emailed?
Today's email or yesterday's email? It, it's on the tool.
Just pop out and then pop back in.